Detector Operations
===================

Long shutdown 2 of the LHC (LS2) is now well underway. During this
shutdown a number of detector improvements are planned, including new
electronics for some muon chambers and the installation and
commissioning of the hadronic calorimeter barrel upgrade. An extensive
program of routine maintenance tasks is also underway.

During this quarter, there have been three safety related incidents at
the experiment. Neither has directly involved US activities, but are
briefly described here. In the first a small fire occurred in a room
housing UPS power supplies. The safety systems behaved as planned, and
the fire brigade was summoned and extinguished the fire. There was minor
damage to the CMS control room resulting from the misting system being
trigger by smoke but this has not had a significant impact on work at
CMS.

In the second incident, $\rm CO_2$ was released into the experimental
cavern, in particular into the Vac tank. There was no damage or injuries
but the incident is under investigation. The release occurred in an area
where the hadronic barrel calorimeter (HB) installation is taking place.
Fortunately at the time of this incident there was no one working on HB.
The incident is under investigation and going forward HB work will not
take place while $\rm CO_2$ activities are under way.

In the third incident, a jig that was being used to lift some shielding
broke causing the shielding to be dropped. Fortunately proper safety
procedures were being followed and no one was under the crane as the
work took place, thus there were no injuries. This incident is also
being investigated.

Below we summarize the work this quarter by subsystem.

BRIL 
-----

During LS2 two PLT detectors are built for the BRIL system. The
milestone timeline for the refurbishment has been set aggressively and
is on track within a week. All components for the first quarter are
tested and ready for mounting. Two laboratories (P5, TIF) were
established, for assembly and testing of the new PLTs, and for studying
the radiation damage on the old extracted PLT. The production of the
re-designed opto-motherboards started. The first two boards arrived and
were tested; 13 more need to be built at CERN. \@0 more detector planes
were sent from PSI; from previous batch bonding on several planes needed
to be redone. The availability of DOHs is not a concern anymore. For a
subset the connectors have been exchanged. An attenuation test stand has
been setup to perform quality tests as they are irradiated and their
degradation needs to be quantified. Cold tests for the replacement PLT
are in preparation. The freezer failed and needs replacement. One
quarter plus full readout will be placed in the freezer box. The
operation software update and documentation started. The software for
luminosity calculation for the collaboration is finalized and continuous
feedback to the collaboration is provided via hypernews.

  -----------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------ ----------- ----------
  BRIL        Assembly of the               Jun 30 
              replacement PLT - first              
              quarter                              

  BRIL        Cold cycle tests done -       Aug 31 
              one quarter                          

  BRIL        Assemble quarters 2,3,4       Sep 30 

  BRIL        Certify quarters for          Nov 31 
              full assembly                        

  BRIL        Mechanical assembly for       Dec 31 
              PLT ready (store in cold             
              boxes)                               

  BRIL        Full Run 2 Luminosity         Dec 31 
              analysis /software                   
              review                               
  -----------------------------------------------------------

  : BRIL 2019 Upgrade Milestones

[\[BRILMIlestones\]]{#BRILMIlestones label="BRILMIlestones"}

Tracker 
--------

We are continuing with LS2 activities and dealing with new problems as
they arise. For strips, we continue to be ready to participate in Global
Running and are exercising the cosmic ray test stand (CRACK). For
pixels, the main emphasis in this quarter has been to start the detector
checkout.

### Pixels 

In preparation for the Forward pixel checkout, we managed to break a
cooling pipe. The break cannot easily be repaired with a laser weld or a
swap of the cooling pipe as each option requires detector dis-assembly.
A mechanical repair is being pursued both at CERN and Fermilab. Fermilab
is also exploring reinforcement techniques for the cooling connections.
We have begun the forward pixel checkout and are proceeding more slowly
than planned on purpose in order to take advantage of any reinforcement
solutions that could come from Fermilab. The main result of the checkout
so far is that we found one of the 16 cable bundles, on the first half
cylinder to be tested, broken and are reviving the test techniques to
determine where the break is and the best repair strategy. We also
diagnosed a high current condition with several high voltage channels
seen during beam operations. The issue was internal to the high voltage
power supply.

### Strips

The plan for strips is to go colder later this year if possible.
Meanwhile, we will keep the strips available for global runs and will
continue to monitor detector conditions. DAQ training and development
will continue using the CRACK as well. We are also fixing any
service/control/safety issues uncovered during the frequent power and
service interruptions typical in LS2.

  Subsystem   Description                         Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- --------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 Detector Removed         Jan 31     Jan 15
  Tracker     Strips cold and in global run          June 1     Mar 20
  Tracker     Strips tested at -25C                  Dec 11 
  Tracker     Pixel initial checkout complete        Aug 31 

  : Tracker 2019 Milestones

[\[TrackerMilestones\]]{#TrackerMilestones label="TrackerMilestones"}

ECAL 
-----

In the second quarter maintenance of the detector continued. The
replacement of the HV power connectors was completed ahead of schedule.
The network upgrade was also completed on schedule. The refurbishment of
the laser barracks began following the transparency measurements earlier
in the year. The floor requires reinforcement to carry the weight of the
optical tables. A plan was made for this. The laser system is also in
the process of being disassembled for a deep maintenance including
sending the lasers to the manufacturer.

Extensive work has gone into generating a final set of calibrations for
the legacy papers from the 2016-17 run. This is known as the "ultra
legacy re-reco\". During the quarter the calibrations were completed.
The re-reco gives significant improvement in the resolution particularly
in the end-cap where the effects of aging are more significant.

The ECAL group met for its annual meeting \"ECAL days\" at ETH in
Zurich. A comprehensive review of all aspects of the detector operations
during LS2 and preparations for LS3 was conducted with two full days of
presentations.

  -----------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------ ----------- ----------
  ECAL        Complete First Laser          Sep 30 
              Maintenance               (April 30) 

  ECAL        Complete Second Laser         Dec 31 
              Maintenance                (July 31) 

  ECAL        Complete infrastructure       Dec 31 
              update of laser barracks             

  ECAL        Complete replacement of      June 30    April 1
              all Maraton input/output             
              Cooling Pipes                        

  ECAL        Complete replacement of      Sept 30     May 15
              input HV power                       
              connectors                           

  ECAL        Complete modification of      Oct 31    April 1
              CANBUS and update DCS                
              software                             

  ECAL        Complete VME PC               Mar 31   March 15
              replacement                          

  ECAL        Complete network upgrade      May 31     May 31

  ECAL        Complete upgrade to           Dec 31 
              XDAQ15                               

  ECAL        Complete installation of      Aug 31 
              new water pump at                    
              surface                              

  ECAL        Complete insulation of        Dec 31 
              surface to underground               
              area pipes                           
  -----------------------------------------------------------

  : ECAL 2019 Milestones

[\[ECAL2018Milestones\]]{#ECAL2018Milestones label="ECAL2018Milestones"}

HCAL
----

During the second quarter of 2019, the HCAL Operations group focused on
completing the remaining components of the HCAL Barrel (HB) Phase 1
Upgrade electronics and on continuing the HB Phase 1 Upgrade
installation.

### HB Installation and Commissioning

The HB Phase 1 upgrade, planned for LS2, is progressing well. The
removal of all the Phase 0 electronics from HB is complete. All Phase 1
backplanes have been installed. All Phase 1 Clock and Control modules
(CCMs) and all Phase 1 Calibration Units (CUs) have been installed.

The two issues came up during the burn-in of the Phase 1 HB electronics
earlier this year have been resolved. The first was that a number of the
SiPM control card mezzanines were of sub-standard quality due to
problems with the assembly process. The boards were remade by Fermilab.
They have been shipped to CERN, tested, and re-installed. The second was
that a very small number of SiPM mounting boards ( $< 0.2\%$) showed an
increase in leakage current when being burned-in. The affected channels
were near the edges of the boards. The problem was identified, an
improved design made, and modified boards built by Fermilab. All the new
boards have arrived at CERN and are being installed in the Readout
Modules (RM). 96 of the new boards have already been installed in RMs
and the testing of the first set of 48 re-worked RMs has begun. All RM
will be burned in for two weeks before being installed in the detector.

Work on both ends of the HB has been progressing in parallel rather than
completing the HB minus end first. This was done in order to accommodate
the need to re-make the SiPM control card mezzanines and mounting boards
as described above. Even with these two issues, it is expected that the
HB Phase 1 Upgrade installation can be completed by the end of 2019. The
current schedule still has 8 weeks of contingency remaining.\
In
table [\[HB Upgrade Milestones\]](#HB Upgrade Milestones){reference-type="ref"
reference="HB Upgrade Milestones"}, all the needed HB upgrade
electronics are abbreviated "HBE".

### HCAL Operations 

Although the HCAL generally performed well during the 2018 running,
there were two significant issues. First, there was an over voltage
transient that occurred during the the power-on of CAEN A3100HBP modules
on June 30 after a CERN wide power cut that caused irreversible damage
of two sectors on the HE minus side, HEM15 and HEM16. Second, HCAL
experienced disruptions to the quality of specific primary control links
between the front-end controllers (FECs) in the CMS service cavern and
the clock, control, and monitoring modules (CCMs) on the detector for
HEP10 and HEM9. Redundant (secondary) control links were enabled for
these detectors and allowed HCAL to continue taking high quality data.
However, the primary control links resumed working correctly about a
month later, and continued working until the end of the run. The
affected electronics for HEM15 and HEM16 as well as HEP10 and HEM9 have
now been removed from the detector. The DC/DC converters on HEM15 and
HEM16 were found to be damaged and these modules have now been
successfully repaired. The HEP10 and HEM9 CCMs have been removed from
the detector and are being tested in Building 904. Depending on the
results of the tests, either those CCMs or spares will be installed back
in the detector. The low voltage power supplies will be shipped back to
CAEN for modification to prevent future over voltage transients during
power-on and a protection circuits for both HE and HB will be designed
and installed during 2019. CAEN has sent a prototype protection circuit
to CERN which was installed in a power supply and successfully tested.
Note that an ad-hoc protection circuit was quickly added to HE after the
June 30, 2018 incident to prevent problems from transients, and CMS will
be able to continue to operate the current low voltage supplies safely
before they are modified.

Also, the FEC and CCM firmware has been upgraded to be compatible with
half-speed control links. This will ease timing and decrease the Single
Event Upset probability.

  Subsystem   Description                                     Scheduled      Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------------------------- ------------- -------------
  HCAL        HBE assembly starts at CERN                    1-Sep-2018    1-Sep-2018
  HCAL        HBE production in "factory mode"              15-Nov-2018   20-Nov-2018
  HCAL        HBE IRR passed                                15-Feb-2019   15-Feb-2019
  HCAL        HBE Minus end upgrade installation begins     19-Feb-2019   18-Feb-2019
  HCAL        HBE production complete                       28-Feb-2019      see text
  HCAL        HBE Minus end Upgrade Complete                30-Jun-2019      see text
  HCAL        HBE Plus end upgrade installation begins       1-Sep-2019 
  HCAL        HBE Plus end Upgrade Complete                 20-Dec-2019 

  : HB Upgrade Milestones

[\[HB Upgrade Milestones\]]{#HB Upgrade Milestones
label="HB Upgrade Milestones"}

  Subsystem   Description                                         Scheduled      Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------------------- ------------- -------------
  HCAL        extract HEM09 and HEP10 CCMs                      10-Feb-2019   30-Jan-2019
  HCAL        extract HEM15 and HEM16 CCMs, RMs, CUs            15-Mar-2019   30-Jan-2019
  HCAL        finalize half-speed FEC and CCM firmware           1-Apr-2019   15-Mar-2019
  HCAL        reinstall HEM09, HEP10 modules                     1-Jun-2019      see text
  HCAL        reinstall HEM15, HEM16 modules                     1-Jun-2019      see text
  HCAL        recommission HE with half-speed control links      1-Jun-2019   15-May-2019
  HCAL        LV PS back to CAEN for modification starts         1-Jun-2019      see text
  HCAL        new LV protection circuits installed               1-Sep-2019 

  : 2019 HCAL Operations Milestones

[\[2019 HCAL Operations Milestones\]]{#2019 HCAL Operations Milestones
label="2019 HCAL Operations Milestones"}

EMU 
----

The major CSC activity in Long Shutdown 2 continues to be the
refurbishment with updated electronics of 180 chambers in the inner
rings of the CSC system. Chambers are extracted from CMS and brought to
the surface at SX5 where the older electronics boards are stripped off,
new ones installed. The refurbished chambers are subjected to a battery
of tests in electronics tests stand in SX5, and then monitored under
power on a long-term-test stand. After a leak test of the cooling
circuits, the chambers are reinstalled in CMS and await recommissioning.
The work of chamber refurbishment and testing, infrastructure
installation and re-commissioning is distributed among small teams that
are composed mostly of graduate students and are led by senior
scientists or postdocs.

The first ring of chambers refurbished was ME-1/1 (the inner ring of the
first station on the negative YE-1 end cap), which comprises 36
chambers. The chambers in this ring required the old digital cathode
front end boards (DCFEBs) to be replaced with new DCFEBv2 boards, and
the ALCT mezzanines to be replaced with new ALCT LX100 boards. All 36
chambers were extracted to the surface during the previous quarter. In
April through June, the refurbishment, testing, and re-installation of
all 36 chambers was completed, and the final chamber was re-installed on
14 June. As of the end of June, 15 chambers have been fully reconnected,
and twelve of these have completed full re-commissioning with cosmic
rays.

The cooling circuit of each chamber is tested for leaks before
re-installation. One of the first ME1/1 chambers to be tested
(ME-1/1/33) was found to have developed a leak at one of the joints.
This chamber was refitted with a new circuit, and the problem was
studied by CMS Technical Coordination and expert engineers from the CERN
main machine shop, and a plan was developed for minimizing the risk of
future leaks. For ME-1/1, we decided not to attempt a systematic repair
of all the cooling circuits of the chambers now and only perform a
repair of circuits which fail the leak test in SX5. In addition, the
refurbishment procedures were altered to minimize any possible stress on
the cooling circuits, and an individual leak detection cable was
installed in each chamber during refurbishment. Aside from the first
chamber that failed, all of the ME-1/1 chambers passed stringent leak
tests, and no other repairs to the cooling circuits were required. For
longer term strategy the CERN central shop has agreed to design and
construct 72 new cooling circuits with a design which does not use any
connection joints. According to the CMS LS2 schedule 36 of those
circuits will be needed by Oct 1st, 2019, in time for the start of the
ME+1/1 electronics upgrade. The CERN central shop has promised to
delivery on time the first batch of 36. The additional 36 will be
installed on ME-1/1 at the earliest opportunity and not later than LS3.

Large-scale assembly of the DCFEBv2 boards has continued since January.
As of the end of June, 450 of the 585 boards (including spares) have
been assembled. The production and testing is expected to conclude early
in the next quarter. 252 DCFEBv2 board were installed in the ME-1/1
ring, and 45 will be installed in the ME+2/1 ring during the summer.
Finally, 252 will be installed in the ME+1/1 ring starting in the Fall.
The quality of the boards is very high.

The ALCT LX100 boards (needed for ME1/1, ME1/2, ME2/2, ME3/2) completed
production in May. The production of ALCT LX150T board (needed for
ME2/1, ME3/1, ME4/1) was started in mid-June after a two-month delay for
financial transfers. The fabrication is complete, and assembly is
expected to finish in mid-July.

The assembly of the new low-voltage infrastructure (supplies, cables,
junction boxes) continued through this quarter. The installation work on
the plus side is about half-way finished and is expected to require most
of July to complete.

The new optical fibers for ME2/1, ME3/1, ME4/1 were all tested at the
vendor and underwent sample testing at CERN to verify the quality. The
fibers are ready for installation.

The old DCFEB boards (252) extracted from ME1/1 were all retrofitted
with VTTx optical transmitters. This operation was carried out by our
colleagues from Tomsk State University (RU). In addition, four 10 $\mu$F
capacitors on each DCFEB are being replaced to reduce the noise on the
2V line. These boards will be installed in the ME+2/1, ME+3/1 and ME+4/1
chambers during the summer.

New Optical Trigger Motherboards (OTMB) are required for ME234/1 once
the DCFEBs are in place. These boards consist of a VME base board plus a
mezzanine that carries the FPGA and optical transceivers. Five
prototypes of each were completed and tested in April and May. The
production readiness review for the OTMB is on 28-June.

In general, the refurbishment has gone as planned aside CMS-wide delays
due to major power outages and the halt of access after the UPS fire
(described in the introduction). The overall schedule is now shifted by
about three weeks from the original schedule. Most milestones are on
track (see table), and mitigation plans are in place for those that have
slipped. The general schedule delays for CMS have had an impact on the
milestones for ME-1/1 commissioning (now foreseen for 8 July) and LV
power for ME+234 (now foreseen for late July). Financial fund transfer
issues delayed the start of production for ALCT-LX150T boards, and these
are now expected in late July. This might require some re-arrangement of
the commissioning and installation plans for ME+2/1.

In summary the activity to install new electronics on CSC chambers has
completed the first ring of 36 chambers, and the work on the second ring
has begun.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                           Scheduled Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------- ----------- ------------
  EMU-MEX/1   CSC LV junction boxes ready for          Jan 15 Feb 1
              installation                                    

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME-1/1 chamber extracted to        Feb 25 Feb 25
              SX5                                             

  EMU-MEX/1   CSC DCFEBv2 boards ready for             Mar 11 Mar 7
              installation on ME-1/1                          

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX100 ready for installation        Mar 11 Mar 7
              in ME-1/1                                       

  EMU-MEX/1   Full production of ALCT-LX150T           Apr 15 Jun 12
              released                                        

  EMU-MEX/1   CSC on-chamber optical fibers ready      Apr 15 May 8
              for installation                                

  EMU-MEX/1   ME-1/1 installed and commissioned         Jun 2 see text

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX150T ready for installation       Jun 10 see text
              in ME+234/1                                     

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME+234/1 chamber extracted to      Jun 17 Jun 20
              SX5                                             

  EMU-MEX/1   New LV power in place for ME+234         Jun 30 see text

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX100 ready for installation        Jun 30 May 17
              on ME2/2,3/2                                    

  EMU-OPS/1   LV power in place for plus end cap        Aug 8 

  EMU-OPS/1   Ready to join MWGR with ME-1/1            Sep 1 

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME+1/1 chamber extracted to        Oct 28 
              SX5                                             

  EMU-OPS/1   Ready to join MWGR with ME+234/1          Nov 1 

  EMU-MEX/1   OTMB production complete                 Nov 15 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : EMU 2019 Milestones

[\[EMUMilestones2019\]]{#EMUMilestones2019 label="EMUMilestones2019"}

DAQ
---

The run-2 DAQ system was fully operational at the beginning of the
reporting period. The DAQ system has been used for commissioning
activities by subsystems. The pixel clean-room DAQ was separated from
the run-2 DAQ testbed and reconfigured as standard miniDAQ setup. The
retired HLT nodes were relocated to make room for the future core
services in the racks power by UPS. They are permanently assigned to the
online cloud and provide 540 kHEPSpec from 24k physical cores. The
latest generation HLT nodes were used to process offline workflows
whenever commissioning activities allowed to. They provide an additional
310 kHEPSpec from 13k cores. The online cloud processed about 1.5
million offline jobs per week with a 98% success rate. All online cloud
nodes were migrated to CC7.6 and the latest Openstack Ocata release.

The DAQ system was switched off on May 17 in anticipation of the
electrical maintenance work affecting all systems at pt.5. After the UPS
incident described above, the cleanup and reinstating of the fire and
UPS protection has delayed the powering back of the upstairs systems
until July 1. This inhibited the use of the miniDAQ systems used for
commissioning activities. It slowed down the event-builder development
for the run-3 DAQ. And the offline computing plans had to be adjusted to
work around the missing online cloud computing resources. A temporary
control room was set up by the sys-admin team in the SCX work/printer
room 3562. This allowed to resume the shift coverage during daytime and
commissioning activities underground. On the surface only the essential
systems (network, Oracle database and DCS) were brought back online, but
they have not been backed by UPS.

The preparations for run 3 continues despite the limited availability of
the run-3 testbed and the additional workload on the sys-admin team. The
order for new computing blades for DCS and cluster services has been
sent out. The specifications for the new VMEPCs have been prepared and
the tender process has been launched. The detailed planning of DAQ
commissioning and interruptions of services during LS2 is in progress.
Tests of new storage manager hardware with a company have been done
using a benchmark application which emulates the merging and transfer
workload. A few open questions need to be follow up with them. We also
need to converge on requirements (for proton and heavy-ion running) by
late summer.

We pursue the possibility for a heterogeneous HLT farm for run 3.
Initial work has shown that the goal of offloading more than 20% of the
HLT CPU to GPUs is realistic for the beginning of run 3. This would make
the option to equip each HLT node with NVIDIA GPUs also financially
attractive. A corresponding proposal has been made to CMS management.
The final decision on this has to be taken in September 2020 before the
tendering process for the new HLT nodes gets underway.

The OMS project is making good progress on restructuring the underlying
database tables. The main issue is to converge on the data inputs, where
we have to rely on work done by other groups in CMS. The transition of
the subsystem specific pages from WbM to OMS is in full swing. The
additional functionality and use cases from these pages require some
design changes in the user-interface back end. These changes are being
implemented in a timely manner. We continue to work on a new scheme on
how to define and report the down- and deadtime accounting of CMS.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                    Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ---------------------------- ----------- ----------
  DAQ         Migrated all DAQ s/w to            Feb 1      Feb 1
              gitlab                                   

  DAQ         RCMS and XDAQ releases from       Mar 15     Mar 15
              gitlab deployed                          

  DAQ         Core XDAQ packages built           Jun 1      Apr 9
              with C++11/14                            

  DAQ         Evaluated storage-manager          Aug 1 
              h/w for run 3                            

  DAQ         OMS DB tables fully replace        Oct 1 
              legacy tables from WbM/SCAL              

  DAQ         Central DAQ hardware choices       Nov 1 
              finalized                                
  ---------------------------------------------------------------

  : DAQ 2019 Milestones

[\[DAQ2019Milestones\]]{#DAQ2019Milestones label="DAQ2019Milestones"}

Trigger
-------

During this quarter the US groups continued their maintenance,
operations, and development work on the Layer-1 calorimeter (CaloL1)
trigger, endcap muon trigger (EMTF), and global Level-1 trigger systems,
as well as on the field operations of the Trigger Studies Group. These
preparations will provide improvements and reliable running during Run 3
data taking operations.

### Endcap Muon Trigger

An introduction and training session on the EMTF system was recently
held to help train a new generation for studies and operations. A total
of 15 people participated including new graduate students,
undergraduates, and a postdoc. Various studies continue in order to
prepare the EMTF for improved trigger performance during Run 3. This
includes the optimization of the compression of the number of bits to
encode the bend angles from CSC + GEM for improved PT resolution, and a
further characterization of the beam halo background to a potential
displaced muon algorithm.

### Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger

The L1Calo smoothly participated in the first Midweek Global Run (MWGR),
March 20-22. During the second quarter, the preparation for removal of
the old RCT cards continued, and the first cards and crates should be
removed and lifted up to the surface in July-August. The exact dates are
under discussion now. The place for storing the parts that can be used
later is prepared.

The preparation for the second MWGR 2019 was done successfully, but the
MWGR was canceled because of some problems in P5 general operation. The
L1Calo group is working on modifying the calibration procedures that
should improve performance of the calorimeter trigger in Run3 and also
few checks are schedule for the SWATCH software update. These checks
will be done during the next MWGR.

### Global Trigger

Work on pileup mitigation in the Level-1 Trigger involved first learning
how to implement neural networks into FPGAs. Work accomplished so far
includes training of a graph NN for muon track finding, pruning the
network using an L1 regularization technique, and implementing the graph
NN for an FPGA via hls4ml. Work is still in progress.

### Field Operations Group of the Trigger Studies Group

A student has recently been stationed at CERN for the summer in order to
be trained on HLT operations from the senior FOG members. Work continues
on improving the rate monitoring tools. Another student is utilizing
Phase-1 L1 Trigger DQM modules as a starting point for the development
of DQM modules for the L1 Trigger Phase 2 sequence (muons, calo,
tracks). This will soon shift to collaboration with the DPGs for Phase 2
specific quantities.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                           Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  TRIG        Architecture for bringing GE1/1          Aug 30 
              signals to EMTF specified                       

  TRIG        EMTF online software framework           Aug 30 
              extended to include GE1/1                       

  TRIG        Neural network PT assignment             Dec 31     Jun 30
              implementation into EMTF firmware               

  TRIG        Initial algorithm to include GE1/1       Dec 31 
              into EMTF                                       

  TRIG        Remove legacy BMTF firmware and          Dec 31 
              keep only Kalman filter                         

  TRIG        Modify the Kalman filter algorithm       Dec 31 
              to use the upgraded trigger                     
              primitives                                      

  TRIG        Deinstall old RCT hardware              Sept 30 

  TRIG        Exchange microSDs in all CTP7 cards     Sept 30 

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Fix the cable trays in       Sept 30 
              P5                                              

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Initial demonstration of       Jul 1 
              pileup mitigation algorithms                    
              involving machine learning using                
              High-Level Synthesis                            

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Performance results of        Dec 31 
              pileup mitigation algorithms                    
              involving machine learning                      

  TRIG        Assess needs for any rate                Dec 31 
              monitoring software developments                

  TRIG        Update rate monitoring software to       Dec 31 
              adapt to evolution in DAQ                       
              infrastructure                                  
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Trigger 2019 Milestones

[\[TRIG2019Milestones\]]{#TRIG2019Milestones label="TRIG2019Milestones"}
