# Detector Operations

The operation of the CMS detector continued relatively smoothly through
to the end of the run. The LHC is now off for its annual Year End
Technical Stop during which time maintenance will be performed on the
accelerator and detectors. Since August the data tacking efficiency has
consistently been greater than the 92.5% taken last year. In early
October a problem appeared in the pixel system that resulted is some
loss of channels which is currently being investigated. It is important
to note that even with this issue the new pixel detector is now working
better than the old one.

![Luminosity, at 13 TeV, delivered by the LHC and recorded by CMS, in 2017.{label="fig:Lumi"}](figures/int_lumi_per_day_cumulative_pp_2017NormtagLumi.png)

## BRIL

The Pixel Luminosity Telescope (PLT) together with the fast beam
condition monitor (BCM1F) and HF provided online luminosity measurements
continuously. The fast readout for all telescopes works but two
telescopes exhibit degraded full pixel information that is used for
track-based studies. Reconstructed tracks are also used for fast
measurements of the beam spot and allow tracking of beam conditions.
Corrections for efficiency and accidentals are obtained from analysis of
tracks offline, and with fast turnaround after completion of each fill
now. These corrections change with beam conditions and expected
reduction of efficiency over time. Corrections are also obtained from
mini-VdM scans at the start and end of a fill. Luminosity based on full
track measurements was broadcast online. Systematic studies led to
improved luminosity precision. Preliminary luminosity values have been
obtained for the 2017 running (preapproval on 19 Dec).

The PLT must be extracted during the year end stop. The lab in P5 with
two cold boxes was established and spare cards prepared in case of
failures -- the +z side was placed in the P5 lab on December 20 and its
functionality tested. It is kept at $-10^o$Â C. The --z side will be
extracted in January.

  Working Metric                                Performance
  ------------------------------------------- -------------
  Fraction of telescopes fully operational              90%
  Efficiency of delivery of lumi histograms         $>$ 99%
  Uptime of lumi histogram production               $>$ 99%
  Lumi lost                                           0 /pb

  : BRIL Metrics

[\[BRILMetrics\]]{#BRILMetrics label="BRILMetrics"}

  Subsystem   Description                   Scheduled         Achieved
  ----------- --------------------------- ----------- ----------------
  BRIL        Update Lumi for 2016            March 1          March 1
  BRIL        Ready for Physics                 May 1            May 1
  BRIL        Improve 2017 Lumi numbers      December   Preapp. Dec 19

  : BRIL Milestones

[\[BRILMIlestones\]]{#BRILMIlestones label="BRILMIlestones"}

