\clearpage

# Program Manager's Summary

During this quarter, the 4th quarter of *calendar year 2015* (Oct -- Dec 2015), the LHC completed its first running period in Run 2. The initial proton-proton physics run was completed, and after a set-up period, LHC collided heavy ions for a month. In mid December the LHC entered a "year end technical stop" (YETS) period with no beams in the machine, giving opportunity for repairs in the experiment areas. 

During the run CMS data taking efficiency was high at an overall 90%.  The total luminosity recorded in CMS during stable beams with $p-p$ collisions at 13 TeV center-of-mass energy was 3.81/fb.  This number includes approximately 0.40/fb of data taken with the magnetic field off or below nominal value due to the problems with the magnet cryogenic system.

In November the run was turned over to the Heavy Ion (HI) physics program.  LHC performed an initial reference proton collision run at the nucleon center-of-mass energy of 5 TeV, delivering 29.5/pb of which CMS recorded 27.9/pb. LHC then switched to lead-on-lead ion collisions, also at $\sqrt{s}=5$ TeV/nucleon, delivering 0.60/nb, of which CMS recorded 0.56/nb. 

At the end of the running period, during the HI run, CMS developed a water leak in the endcap muon system (YE+1) that impacted the operation of the detector and ultimately required to switch off power to the on-detector electronic. CMS ran without the whole Muon Endcap ME+1 station for the last few days of the HI run. Impact on HI data taking was only limited. A search for  leaks and potential damages to detector electronics, as well as repairs are planned for the YETS. This work will impact the already tight schedule of the technical stop in the next quarter, as the CMS heavy elements will need to be opened to perform the repairs.

Scintillator light output in the HCAL is constantly monitored for the effect of radiation damage. We saw that the end cap HE signals continued to degrade due to significant radiation effects on scintillator tiles and wavelength-shifting fibers, and this is expected to continue at a rate that is possibly higher than anticipated. Working groups were formed in November to study the damage, assess its physics impact, and to develop mitigation strategies. HCAL also looks into the possibility of a partial replacement of HE mega-tiles during the Long Shutdown 2 (LS2).

Problems with operating the CMS magnet continued throughout the quarter. Since March the 'Cold Box' (CB) that liquifies Helium for cooling the CMS superconducting solenoid has shown problems, following an incident where compressor oil contaminated the downstream CB circuits. There are now detailed plans for an overall cleanup to be preformed during next quarter's YETS. The oil separation system which is part of the Helium liquification plant will be replaced with a higher-capacity model, which has been ordered to arrive in time for installation during the YETS. 

During the quarter the performance of the CB continued to be instable leading to insufficient production of liquid cold helium. Pressure-drops increasing over filters and adsorbers used to remove contaminants from the system, and variances in the temperature gradient across heat exchangers allowed to track the performance of the system. Breaks were needed to replace filters and regenerate adsobers and heat exchangers in the system, leading to down-times where the magnet could not be adequately cooled and thus had to be switched off. The CERN cryogenics group and CMS Technical Coordination managed to operate the CB with a reasonable duty cycle such that magnet down times could be to some extent synchronized with planned breaks in LHC physics operations. The impact on CMS data taking thus was minimized, and despite the ongoing difficulties with operating the CMS magnet, physics data taking was rather successful. Overall the CB issues resulted in loss of just about 10% of the total integrated luminosity during the run, and in the end only marginally effected CMS' physics productivity. 

On going LHC and CMS activities determined the agenda for Software and Computing during the quarter. The end of the proton running allowed for a reprocessing pass for both data and simulation samples. A lot of work was done in software to be ready and to prepare the facilities and infrastructure systems for the data processing. The HI run with its higher data taking rate put particular strains on many aspects of the system, which required fast turnaround on a number of development efforts. These will be useful for the proton program as higher luminosities are reached. Finally, the start of the LHC technical stop allowed all computing facilities to focus on reprocessing activities. 

The Resource Managers report section gives a detailed financial summary of the year 2015. The total spending for the U.S. CMS Operations Program in 2015 was $38,235K, of which $17,483K was spent on Software and Computing, $7,420K on Detector Operations and $4,015K on R&D for HL-LHC detector upgrades. A sum of $9,317K was spent on Common Operations, including $4,903K on CMS common cost for Cat-A maintenance and operations cost and the detector upgrade Common Fund for Phase 1. Management reserve funds totaling $700k were allocated over the year to deal with problems that required additional spending. The total cost variances were larger than that, as reported through change orders and in the quarterly reports. However, cost savings largely canceled out cost increases. In particular the exchange rate to Swiss Franc turned out to be favorable. A total of 27% of the spending was in Swiss Franc, at an average exchange rate of 0.96 CHF/USD, while the program had planned for a rate of 0.9 CHF/USD.  A total of 109 SOWs (71 DOE and 38 NSF) were produced with U.S. universities and labs.

With the LHC ["Data Jamboree"](https://indico.cern.ch/event/442432/)^[https://indico.cern.ch/event/442432/] on December 15 a challenging year ended with a real physics highlight. CMS presented[^1] 33 different results using the initial Run 2 data at 13 TeV. The breadth of the physics and the fast turnaround to come to publishable results demonstrates the excellent operational performance of the detector, software, and computing systems.  It is a testament to the success of all the operations tasks that are required to get from data to physics objects with which analysis can be performed.

[^1]: Slides of the CMS presentation are available [here](https://indico.cern.ch/event/442432/contributions/1946922/attachments/1205563/1756687/CMS_13_TeV_results_public.pdf "Data Jamboree CMS Presentation")

