\clearpage

# Program Manager's Summary

During this quarter, the second quarter of  **calendar year 2016** (2016Q2),  the LHC winter technical stop ended, and CMS got ready to take physics.   After an early commissioning period, the experiment has transitioned to steady physics quality data taking.  LHC performance was breaking records in instanteneous luminosity, beam intensity and running efficiency. This allowed CMS to take large amounts of data, and also mean that CMS trigger and data taking chains were strained to deal with the highest luminosities that have ever been achieved.  While this has presented some challenges, the quality of the data has been excellent and the experiment has had a data taking efficiency of approximately 92% during this period. 

All subcomponents with U.S. M&D responsibility preformed well, with detailed metric regardin performance and data taking efficiency given in the Detector Operations section.  Before and during the first weeks of the new run detector components were calibrated and timed-in, achieving resultions and preformance at the level of previous year or better.  A number of detector components were repaired, and others were upgraded, in partiular in the Regional Calorimter Trigger, the Endcap Muon Trigger  and some HCAL readout frontends. These are Phase1 detector upgrade deliverables that were commissioned and integrated. Details are given in later in the report.

Software and computing was well-prepared for the start of the run, and given the fast on-set of high luminosity running CMS quickly produced a dataset larger than that of 2015.  So from the beginnin of the run U.S. CMS Software and Computing needed to operate at its highest levels while also preparing for a future of even stronger machine performance.  The U.S. computing facilities all had high levels of availability and usage, which allowed for the efficient reconstruction of detector data and the simulation of billions of events that would be needed for analyses targeting ICHEP 2016 in August.  Meanwhile, there was a concerted effort from both the development and operations teams to bring innovations such as multicore processing, premixed pileup samples for simulations and resizeable jobs into production.  While some of these innovations are still coming to full fruition, the pieces are now in place for success.  Work continues on aspects of data access that will make opportunistic resources more useful to CMS, and tests of production workflows on those resources have given positive results.  Software development is already looking forward to 2017, in anticipation of new detector components and even higher instantaneous luminosity.  Looking even further into the future, efforts continue on long-term projects such as improved software packaging, new data access protocols and track reconstruction on new computing architectures.

The report from the Resource Manager gives detailted account of spending and changes in the spending plan, as tracked through change tracking. One gib bill payed was for the U.S. contribution to the CMS Maintenance and Operations cost, which are invoiced in Swiss franc. Resources deployed at CERN, and paid directly in Swiss francs, account for approximately 27% of the 2016 spending plan. The bills in Swiss francs covered during this period came in at exchange rates of 0.97 CHF/USD which led to cost savings over the rate of 0.9 CHF/USD used for planning. This allowed project management to respond to additional needs in particular for detector operations. A list of these changes can be found in the tables in the Resource Manager's report in the next section.


