
\clearpage

# Detector Operations
 
During this quarter, CMS came out of the winter technical stop ready to take physics.   After an early commissioning period, the experiment has transitioned to steady physics quality data taking.  The performance of the LHC has been record breaking and the experiment has had to deal with the highest luminosities that have ever been achieved.  While this has presented some challenges, the quality of the data has been excellent and the experiment has had a data taking efficiency of approximately 92% during this period.  Below we review the status of various US contributions to the detector. 

## BRIL

The luminosity calibration for physics analyses shown at the ICHEP 2016 conference during the summer was obtained from a successful VdM scan and by combining measurements from different systems.  The U.S.-built Pixel Luminosity Telescope (PLT) provides full hit-information for track reconstruction, now at significantly higher rate. The track analysis has improved and provides corrections for the luminosity measurement due to non-luminosity contributions, and monitors beam conditions. The track measurement is prepared to provide an independent online luminosity value.

Online monitoring and DQM were improved to include the experiences gained during the 2015 run. As the data taking commenced warning and alarm tools were commissioned that reduce the pressure on shift personnel. Although some elements of the system were not working, the luminosity measurement was not affected by this.  Replacements to be installed during EYETS 2016/17 are being assembled and tested in a simulated environment in the laboratory at CERN.

Metric                                     Performance
---------------------------------------    ------------ 
Fraction of telescopes fully operational           82 % 
Efficiency of delivery of lumi histograms      $>$ 99 % 
Uptime of lumi  histogram production           $>$ 99 % 

  : BRIL Metrics\label{BRILMetrics}.

Subsystem   Description                         Scheduled  Achieved
----------  ------------------------------  ------------- ---------
BRIL        Recommission Hardware                   March     March
BRIL        Ready to deliver Lumi                     May       May
BRIL        Improved Lumi Numbers for 2016       December 
BRIL        Recover telescopes              EYETS 2016/17

  : BRIL Milestones\label{BRILMilestones}.


## Tracker

The tracker system has maintained good availability and has met its milestone.

### Pixels

The Forward Pixel detector had an early issue with a poor threshold setting leading to a loss of resolution. The mistake, affecting about 6% of the 2016 data taken before June 30, was fixed shortly after being detected from results of the timing scan. We are also nearing the point in luminosity where we may need to refine compensation mechanisms for pixel.
   
### Strips

With the increase in luminosity, there has been dynamic efficiency loss in the fist layer of the Strip detector. There are ongoing investigations into mitigating the effects and updating the simulation due to Heavily Ionizing Particles (HIPs) and pileup from to the 25ns beam structure. There are no clear winners yet for the mitigation.  

Metric                                      Pixels   Strips
------------------------------------------ -------  ------- 
% Working channels                            98.7     96.5 
Fraction of deadtime attributed                13%      12%

  : Tracker Metrics\label{TrackerMetrics}.

Subsystem   Description                   Scheduled   Achieved
----------- --------------------------- ----------- ----------
Tracker     Ready for Physics&May               May
Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 ready to install     Nov.

  : Tracker Milestones\label{TrackerMilestones}.


## ECAL

In this quarter the ECAL rapidly achieved all its performance milestones and metrics. The system operated with high efficiency and very little downtime. The trigger, selective readout and spike killing thresholds were all retuned and deployed on time. The stage 2 of the ECAL phase 1 trigger upgrade was successfully deployed, leading to sharper turn-on curves and better position resolution. The calibrations rapidly achieved the same resolution performance as 2015. The refurbishment of the LV crates was completed on schedule in April. There were no major problems with hardware, DAQ and trigger, or software during the second quarter. 

Metric                                      Performance
------------------------------------------ ------------
Fraction of channels operational: EB             99.07%
Fraction of channels operational: EE             98.71%
Fraction of channels operational: ES             99.75%
Fraction of deadtime attributed                     33%
Resolution performance                        Excellent

  : ECAL Metrics\label{ECALMetrics}.


Subsystem   Description                         Scheduled   Achieved
----------- --------------------------------- ----------- ----------
ECAL        Complete LV Connector Repairs           March      March
ECAL        Reestablish same level of
            working channels as fall                April        May
ECAL        Reestablish L1 Performance                May        May
ECAL        Confirm resolution performancet          June       June

  : ECAL Milestones\label{ECALMilestones}.


## HCAL


During the second quarter of 2016, the HCAL Operations group focused on completing the commissioning of the new hardware installed during the 2016 YETS and on acquiring good data.  The upgraded hardware includes: switching to  $\mu$TCA (Phase I) back-ends as the primary read-out for HB/HE, switching to the Stage-2 L1 trigger based on HB/HE trigger primitives from the $\mu$TCAs as well as increased segmentation in the HF trigger towers, and the installation of a split readout from one PMT box for HF where the signals from 22 PMTs go both to the current QIE8 frontends and a prototype Phase 1 Upgrade HF QIE10 frontend.  

The HCAL group is also commissioning a small system on the Castor table located close to the beamline to study radiation damage to new scintillators that might be used in a possible replacement of some of the HE scintillator during Long Shutdown 2 or as scintillator for the HL-LHC Upgrades. This system uses prototype Phase 1 HE electronics and will enable the HCAL group to gain valuable operational experience with this new electronics as well.  The system will be installed during the July Technical Stop.

Signal loss due to radiation damage in the HE continued roughly as expected as a function of integrated luminosity based on previous years' data.

#### Milestones for this Quarter

June 1 Milestone:
Operate HCAL detector efficiently with goal to minimize of data due to HCAL to 1% or less, maintain calibration at 1-2% level with efficient noise rejection and improved 25ns energy reconstruction.

Achieved by end of May except calibration at 3% to 4% level.  Calibration and energy reconstruction improvements continue.

#### Metrics

Fraction of channels working

- HF:  3 channels out of 1728 dead (99.8\%\ working channels)
- HB:  3 channels out of 2592 dead (99.9\%\ working channels)
- HE:  1 channel out of 2592 dead (99.96\%\ working channels)
- HO:  9 channels out of 2160 dead (99.6\%\ working channels)
- Total:  16 channels out of 9072 dead (99.8\%\ working channels)

Fraction of downtime and data lost at certification due to HCAL

- Goal: less than 1% for both.
Achieved second quarter: 0.8%.

Precision of absolute HCAL absolute energy calibration 

- Goal: 2% . Currently 3% to 4%.

Inter-calibration uniformity between individual HCAL towers (HBHE, HO, HF)

- Goal 1-2%. Currently 3% to 4%  systematic differences between different phi symmetry methods.

Subsystem   Description                                Scheduled   Achieved
----------- ---------------------------------        ----------- ----------
HCAL        Ready for Physics                                May        May
HCAL        Provide resource loaded schedule
            for EYETS work                                  July
HCAL        Prepared for HE/HF front end
            electronics installation                        Dec.
HCAL        Complete Rad Dam studies                        Dec.

  : HCAL Milestones\label{HCALMilestones}.


## EMU

The CSCs have been operating well, although a very small number (about 0.5\%) of the electronics boards showed operational problem when the CMS solenoid was energized.   Some of these were recovered in work in accesses. The timing settings were verified with the first colliding beam data, and required very little adjustment in the settings.

As higher values of instantaneous luminosity were achieved in the later part of the quarter, these were incidents observed where particular DCFEBs stop taking data.  This is believe to be related to Single Event Upsets (SEUs) in the optical transceivers.  These boards are currently restored by remote power cycling, and studies are ongoing to develop ways to recover from these SEUs automatically.

New firmware was installed on all of the Trigger Motherboards (TMBs) and Optical Trigger Motherboards (OTMBs) that now provides monitoring of many individual rates and correlated rates of the various signals used in triggering chambers.  The study of this monitoring data is essential to predict the behavior of the system at higher luminosity values.  The software was also finalized to allow monitoring of single event upsets (SEUs) in the Digital Front End Boards.

Work continued on investigation, repair, mitigation of water leaks.  Techniques for repairing and preventing future leaks to the ME1/1 cooling system were investigated.  A solution now favored involves epoxy sheaths around the joints in the cooling pipes.  Further tests are required to verify that this provides robust joints.  Meanwhile, no additional leaks have developed since the original one occurred in November 2015. 

The performance of the CSC system was assessed with the new data. The efficiencies for hits and segments were measured in the 2016 data and results were comparable to the 2015 values.  The hit resolution was also studied and was found to be slightly better than in 2015.

Metric                                      Performance
------------------------------------------ ------------
% Working channels                                98.7%
Fraction of deadtime attributed                      3%
Median spatial resolution                    121 $\mu$m

  : CSC Metrics\label{TrackerMetrics}.


Subsystem   Description                                Scheduled   Achieved
----------- ---------------------------------        ----------- ----------
EMU         CSC ready for collisions                         May      April
EMU         Extract SEU rates for DCFEBs                    June       June
EMU         Implement additional coincidence
	    counters in (O)TMB                              July       June
EMU         Implement improved CSC segment
	    pattern recognition                           August  in progress

  : EMU Milestones\label{EMUMilestones}.

## DAQ

Metric                                      Performance
------------------------------------------ ------------ 
Dead time due to trigger throttling            $\sim$ 0
Downtime due to DAQ                             15\ min

  : DAQ Metrics\label{DAQMetrics}.

Subsystem   Description                                Scheduled   Achieved
----------- ---------------------------------        ----------- ----------
DAQ         New HLT Nodes
            installed and commissioned                       May        May
DAQ         uTCA test system added to DAQ2VAL                Aug
DAQ         DAQ2 ready for 2 MB event size
	    and 50 event pileup                              Dec

  : DAQ Milestones\label{DAQMilestones}.

During Year-End Technical Stop 2015-2016 DAQ was optimized to build events with up to 1.2 MB event sizes at L1 accept rate of 100 kHz, and an HLT output bandwidth of $\sim$ 2 GB/s. The DAQ is performing with very little down time ($\sim$ 15 min) and negligible dead time. There was only 15 minutes down time, which  was due to disk failure in the storage manager system. Figure {@fig:FEDsizes} shows the event size vs. number of reconstructed primary vertices as measured in a recent run.  Work is underway to use these measurements to optimize the event builder for larger event sizes using the actual distribution of fragment sizes.

![Event size distribution vs. number of reconstructed primary vertices.  At the start of a typical LHC fill, average number of reconstructed primary vertices is $\sim$ 22 corresponding to average event size of 1.2 MB. Work has started to optimize the system for even larger event sizes expected when pileup will increase another 30%.](figures/FEDsizes_vertices.png){#fig:FEDsizes}

Recent measurements show,  that without hypethreading, the present L1/HLT menus and 100\,kHz L1 rate, result in HLT CPUs that are $\sim$ 85% loaded at the start of the fills. Trigger coordination estimates that hyper-threading will provide 15-20% additional CPU power. Other handles for reducing the time per event are being worked on. The high accept rate of the HLT is also putting lots of pressure on transfer system. Occasional delays in the transfer to tier 0 were mitigated by adding more transfer nodes that are handling files from different luminosity sections.


## Trigger

During this quarter U.S. groups continued their work on the Stage-2 Layer-1 Calorimeter (CaloL1) Trigger Upgrade, and the endcap muon trigger upgrade as both moved into steady state operations and data-taking. 

### Regional Calorimeter Trigger and Stage-2 Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger

The Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger (CaloL1) built by the University of Wisconsin group, as a part of the complete Calorimeter Phase-1 Trigger Upgrade, has been in continuous operations since p-p data taking started in late April 2016 CaloL1 has been in continuous operation.  

Through this time, the tools for operation and monitoring have matured.  The CaloL1 online software (SWATCH) has been in operation since the beginning of March, and includes link and error monitoring, Look-Up Table verification, and checks during state changes to ensure reliable operation.  Hot tower monitoring is in development.  The online Data Quality Monitoring (DQM) described in the previous report has been updated to include emulation of the data sent by CaloL1 to L2 using the Calorimeter Trigger Primitives received.  


### Endcap Muon Trigger

The Rice University, Northeastern, and University of Florida groups have successfully commissioned the Phase-1 upgrade for the endcap muon trigger for 2016 physics operations. 

The commissioning of the endcap muon trigger has included resolving discrepancies in the software emulator vs. firmware results on data, now at the level of 2% but under continued study.  The online DQM package for the new system was developed by the groups and deployed in time for the first collisions, and has been used to spot some detector and optical link issues that have been resolved. Experts from the university groups have maintained on-call coverage of the system during the physics runs that took place during this quarter. 

Subsystem   Description                                Scheduled   Achieved
----------- ---------------------------------        ----------- ----------
TRIG        Restore RCT for Physics                        March       done
TRIG        Stage 2 Layer 1 ready for
            Med. Lumi. Physics                             April       done
TRIG        Commision Stage 2 Layer 1  for
            High Lumi. Physics                               Dec
TRIG        CSCTF Ready for physics                        April       done 
TRIG        Ship one uTCA Muon Sorter to CERN              April       done
TRIG        Commission initial uTCA Muon Sorter
            Firmware                                        July
TRIG        Commission final uTCA Muon Sorter
            Firmware (Ghostbusting)                          Dec

  : Trigger Milestones\label{TriggerMilestones}.

Metric                                          Performance
---------------------------------------------- ------------ 
Frac of MPC Channels                                   100%
Frac of Upgrade EMUTF Channels                         100%
Frac of deadtime attributed to Upgrade EMUTF             2%
Frac of Stage-2 Layer-1 Channels                       100%
Frac of deadtime attributed to Stage 2 Layer 1           0%

  : Trigger Metrics\label{TriggerMetrics}.

