Detector Operations
===================

After an outstanding proton-proton run, the LHC switched to heavy ion
collisions in November. CMS recorded a total of 38$fb^{-1}$ of proton
proton data in 2016 taken at 13 TeV. The heavy ion running was colliding
protons on lead at two energies, 5.02 TeV and 18.6 TeV. Below we provide
additional details on the performance of the various subdetectors. In
December the accelerator and detector were shut down for an extended
year end technical stop (EYETS). This will be used to perform a number
of upgrades, most importantly the installation of a new pixel detector
for CMS.

BRIL 
-----

The Pixel Luminosity Telescope (PLT) participated successfully in the
proton-proton collision and the heavy ion physics runs. The monitoring
and alarm tools were working and allowed fast turnaround in critical
situations. The PLT measured sources of background that correlate well
with similar measurements performed by the beam conditions monitoring
systems. The PLT can measure it in two ways, the occupancy of the PLT in
non-colliding but filled bunches, and the occupancy of the PLT preceding
a bunch train. The PLT published online background measurements.

The luminosity measurement quality was continuously checked and values
are made accessible for data analyses from a database. Successful
calibration was obtained with VdM scans in pp-collisions and for the
heavy ion running. The luminosity values for 2016 pp-runs have been
improved by offline analysis of measurements from the pixel, HF, BCM1F,
and PLT detectors. Comparison between CMS and ATLAS measurements is
ongoing. The likely cause for an approximately 5% difference between the
two experiments is the different beam profile at the two collision
points.

During the EYETS two dead telescopes in one quadrant are scheduled for
repair. Spare parts have been assembled and placed in the laboratory at
CERN for further testing. The port card which is responsible for the
communication with the detectors is the potential source of the failure.
The laboratory at P5 is installed.

  Working Metric                                Performance
  ------------------------------------------- -------------
  Fraction of telescopes fully operational              82%
  Efficiency of delivery of lumi histograms             99%
  Uptime of lumi histogram production                   99%

  : BRIL Metrics

\[BRILMetrics\]

  Subsystem   Description                                        Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------------------- --------------- ----------
  BRIL        Recommission Hardware                                  March      March
  BRIL        Ready to deliver Lumi                                    May        May
  BRIL        Provide online beam background measurement           October    October
  BRIL        Improved Lumi Numbers for 2016                      December   December
  BRIL        Recover telescopes                             EYETS 2016/17 

  : BRIL Milestones

\[BRILMIlestones\]

Tracker 
--------

The tracker system performed to expectations.

### Pixels 

The Forward Pixel detector had a small (order 2%) issue in late proton /
early heavy ion running with a loss of efficiency in the inner barrel
layer. The loss was traced to a needed increase in the regulated digital
voltage sent to the Read Out Chip (ROC). The needed increase was a
consequense of the acumulated radiation damage and indicated that the
Barrel Pixel inner layer was entering a new regime where non-traditional
settings needed to be adjusted in order to operate the ROCs. Otherwise,
pixel operations were routine. The Phase 1 project is using the time
before installation to replace damaged cables. Hence the Phase 1
detector will not be ready to be installed until Q1 2017.

### Strips

The previously reported fix to the inner layer has held up well. Issues
have just been routine maintenance.

                                                  Pixels   Strips
  ---------------------------------------------- -------- --------
  % Working channels                              98.72    96.23
  Fraction of deadtime attributed (Protons)        1.3%    20.3%
  Fraction of deadtime attributed (Proton-Ion)      0%     10.3%

  : Tracker Metrics

\[TrackerMetrics\]

  Subsystem   Description                        Scheduled               Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------- ----------- ----------------------
  Tracker     Ready for Physics                        May                    May
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 ready to install          Nov.   (delayed to Q1 2017)

  : Tracker Milestones

\[TrackerMilestones\]

ECAL 
-----

The operation of the ECAL achieved its performance milestones in the
first quarter of 2016. The second and third and fourth quarters have
thus been devoted to maintaining the excellent performance. A particular
focus in the fourth quarter was to prepare the calibrations for a
re-reconstruction of the data as a legacy dataset in 2017. The
calibration used during 2016 provided comparable precision to previous
runs in 2012 and 2015 (an average of 1.5% in the barrel, 2.5% in the
endcap) but extensive work has been done to understand better the time
dependence of the crystal transparency, photo-detector gains and
pedestals that should result in an improved performance. In addition the
higher statistics data samples of Z’s and W’s will provide a better
intercalibration.

  Metric                                   Performance
  -------------------------------------- -------------
  Fraction of channels operational: EB         99.07 %
  Fraction of channels operational: EE         98.71 %
  Fraction of channels operational: ES         99.75 %
  Fraction of deadtime attributed                  26%
  Resolution performance                         1.54%

  : ECAL Metrics

\[ECALMetrics\]

  Subsystem   Description                        Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  ECAL        Complete LV Connector Repairs          March      March
  ECAL        Reestablish same level of                    
              working channels as fall               April        May
  ECAL        Reestablish L1 Performance               May        May
  ECAL        Confirm resolution performance          June       June

  : ECAL Milestones

\[ECALMilestones\]

HCAL
----

During the fourth quarter of 2016, the HCAL Operations group focused on
acquiring good data and on preparing for the 2016-2017 EYETS.

The HCAL performed extremely well in 2016 and only 26 pb$^{-1}$ of data
was lost due to HCAL problems of the 41 fb$^{-1}$ delivered (less than
0.1%). The quality of the HCAL data was also excellent with only
126 pb$^{-1}$ of the 37 fb$^{-1}$ certified as good for physics lost due
to HCAL problems. This represents a reduction of a factor of four from
2015 and meant that HCAL was responsible for only about 10% of the data
lost in offline certification. The key to this improved performance was
a much improved HCAL alarm tool and improved data quality monitoring.

HCAL performance during the heavy ion run was also excellent with
similar high efficiency as in the proton-proton running.

During the fourth quarter, signal loss due to radiation damage in the HE
continued roughly as expected as a function of integrated luminosity
based on previous years’ data.

Work continued on those Phase I electronics upgrades which are planned
to be installed in the 2016-17 EYETS. These include upgrades to both the
HF and HE frontends.

All the components for the HF upgrades are at CERN including those
needed for both converting to dual anode readout of PMTs and installing
new QIE10 boards. The installation of the HF upgrade began in December
after the end of the heavy ion run with the removal of the first 21 PMT
boxes from HF-, and progress so far has been ahead of schedule.

For HE, the problems with the ngCCMs have been overcome by producing a
second batch of HE ngCCMs which have now been received at CERN. All
needed parts are on hand at CERN. However, there are remaining concerns
about the firmware which is still under development and has increased
latency with respect to the current system. Since the HE electronics
boards will not be accessible after they are installed, there is
heightened concern that an incident during firmware reprogramming, such
as an inopportune power cut, might render the HE electronics hardware
inoperable, with no chance to replace it. Accordingly, there will be a
review on January 13, 2017 where the decision will be made whether to
proceed with the HE upgrades in the 2016-17 EYETS.

<span>*Milestones for this Quarter*</span>\
June 1 Milestone\
Operate HCAL detector efficiently with goal of loss of data due to HCAL
less than 1% and maintain calibration at 1-2%  level with efficient
noise rejection and improved reconstruction.\
Achieved by end of May except calibration at 3% to 4% level. Calibration
and energy reconstruction improvements continue.\
\
December Milestone\
Complete 2016 Radiation damage studies including Castor table studies.\
The necessary data was taken and preliminary results available by the
end of December. Data analysis continues.

Metrics: Fraction of channels working:\
HF: 2 channels out of 1728 dead (99.9% working channels)\
HB: 3 channels out of 2592 dead (99.9% working channels)\
HE: 1 channel out of 2592 dead (99.96% working channels)\
increased latency with respect to the legacy system, HO: 9 channels out
of 2160 dead (99.6% working channels)\
Total: 15 channels out of 9072 dead (99.83% working channels)\
Fraction of downtime and data lost at certification due to HCAL\
Goal: less than 1% for both. Achieved for third 2016: 0.06% downtime
loss and 0.3% additional loss at certification.\
Precision of absolute HCAL absolute energy calibration\
Goal: 2% . Achieved 2% .\
Inter-calibration uniformity between individual HCAL towers (HBHE, HO,
HF)\
Goal 1-2 %  . Achieved 1-3% systematic differences between different phi
symmetry methods.\

  Subsystem   Description                          Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ---------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  HCAL        Ready for Physics                          May        May
  HCAL        Provide resource loaded schedule               
              for EYETS work                            July       July
  HCAL        Prepared for HE/HF front end                   
              electronics installation                  Dec.    HF Dec.
  HCAL        Complete Rad Dam studies                  Dec.       Dec.

  : HCAL Milestones

\[HCALMilestones\]

EMU 
----

The CSCs finished the 2016 proton run with very little downtime to CMS.
They operated smoothly in the heavy ion run as well, aside from one
period when a low-voltage power supply failed and a 60-degree sector was
disabled.

The chambers being tested at the GIF++ facility finished the year with a
radiation dose equivalent to ten years of HL-LHC running, at
$5\times10^{34}$ $cm^{-2}s^{-1}$ luminosity, with no signs of aging
so far. The testing will continue next year to establish a safety
factor.

As a follow-up to EPROM issues encountered in the DCFEB boards and MPC
cards, a radiation test was carried out at the CHARM facility at CERN.
The boards irradiated were MPC mezzanine prototypes carrying two EPROM
samples as well as four anode front end boards. They were exposed to
about 34 krads in a 1-week time period. Full analysis of the irradiated
boards is still under way.

A USCMS EMU electronics workshop was held a Texas A&M on 6-9 December.
The main focus was new electronics boards design for phase 2 upgrade,
but many useful engineering discussions took place concerning the
operation of the present CSC system.

The CSC system power and gas were shut down on 16-December, and the year
end technical stop began. Plans were made to make preventive cooling
repairs on four ME1/1 chambers and to extract five faulty DCFEB boards
for analysis and replacement. This is expected to take place in early
January. If other (non-muon) activities are curtailed, cooling repairs
could be made on additional ME1/1 chambers.

  % Working channels                   98.4%
  --------------------------------- ------------
  Fraction of deadtime attributed        1%
  Median spatial resolution          170 $\mu$m

  : CSC Metrics

\[CSCMetrics\]

  ----------- ---------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  Subsystem   Description                          Scheduled   Achieved
  EMU         CSC ready for collisions                   May      April
  EMU         Extract SEU rates for DCFEBs              June       June
  EMU         Implement additional coincidence               
              counters in (O)TMB                        July       June
  EMU         Implement improved CSC segment                 
              pattern recognition                     August       July
  ----------- ---------------------------------- ----------- ----------

  : EMU Milestones

\[EMUMilestones\]

DAQ
---

The DAQ system is pushed in all fronts to its limit due to CMS’s desire
to collect a maximum number of events especially during proton-lead runs
at the end of the year. Obtimization and additional Storage Manager
hardware installed during last Quarter payed off and DAQ was able to
record  6 GB/s during p-lead operations with ver negligiable dead time.
The downtime contribution of the DAQ system is $\sim 1$ minutes during
the reporting period.

WEB Based Minitoring Upgrade project kickoff workshop took plance in
Vilnius. Architectire and PI between the Aggregation Layer and
presentation layer was base lined. Simple prototype as a proof of
pronciple of the proposed achitecture and API is due end of April.

DAQ Test Stand (DAQVAL) is partitined to provide a second minidaq for
commissioning of the Pixel Phase I detector before installation in
cavern. A second partion is used for the development and testing of the
control softare of the new readout module (FEROL40) that will be
deployed to readout the new Pixel detector.

A new minidaq system is commissioned in Building 904 that is be used by
HCAL. System could be expanded to have 8 DAQ coulmns to accomudate other
sub-systems.

  Dead time due to trigger throttling    $\sim 0$
  ------------------------------------- ---------
  Downtime due to DAQ                     1min

  : DAQ Metrics

\[DAQMetrics\]

  Subsystem   Description                                                Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  DAQ         New Sub-systems integrated and commissioned                      Apr 
  DAQ         Event builder expanded, re-optimized for larger events           Jun 
  DAQ         Old HLT Nodes replaced and commissioned                          Jun 
  DAQ         Prototype new WMB ready for field tests                          Dec 

  : DAQ Milestones

\[DAQMilestones\]

Trigger
-------

### Regional Calorimeter Trigger and Stage-2 Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger

The Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger (CaloL1), built by the University of
Wisconsin - Madison, is a part of the complete Calorimeter Phase-1
Trigger Upgrade. It operated during the last quarter in p-p and p-Pb
physics runs. CaloL1 was shut down and remained off for about 40 hours
around the 2nd of November. The CMS detector went dormant to avoid
issues during a replacement of a 400 kV transformer in the French power
lines supplying CERN. The operation of CaloL1 was restored on the 3rd of
November without issue and it was in continuous operation until the
beginning of the Extended Year End Technical Stop (EYETS) on 5 December,
when rack cooling went off. Also in this period, the CaloL1 online
software (SWATCH) was updated to 0.11.1, which fixed general SWATCH
issues sending alerts to the L1 Page, the main trigger shifter
interface. The plans for the next quarter are to improve the CaloL1
error handling in SWATCH (e.g. SMS messages to experts), update the
calibrations and scale factors for CaloL1, work with ECAL trigger
experts regarding two issues with ECAL links, and move 72 HCAL fibers at
CaloL1 due to a HCAL $\mu$HTR firmware mapping change.

### Endcap Muon Trigger

The Rice University, Northeastern, and University of Florida groups have
successfully supported and made incremental improvements to the phase-1
upgrade for the endcap muon trigger for the remainder of 2016 physics
operations. Experts from these groups maintained on-call coverage of the
system during the physics runs that took place during this quarter. For
the running period overall, only 1.3% of the run downtime was attributed
to the EMTF system. Four MPC cards that had been replaced were sent to
Rice University for diagnosis and repair, which required in once
instance a new optical pigtail and in others reprogramming an EPROM. The
DAQ firmware for the EMTF was reworked to use an 80 MHz clock (from 40)
to improve its high rate performance, which now no longer is a
limitation for CMS high-rate running. The online SWATCH software that
controls EMTF is essentially complete in its baseline functionality.
Development during this quarter included adding the ability to load and
verify the large PT LUT (previously performed by an expert tool). The
algorithm firmware was updated in the EMTF to switch to symmetric
patterns, which has reduced the logic space usage in the FPGA somewhat.
The EMTF emulator in the CMSSW offline software was completely rewritten
for ease of long-term maintenance and extension, and shows better better
agreement with the results from the firmware. A detailed comparison of
the LCTs received by the EMTF with those by the legacy CSCTF show
agreement to 99.8%, with the remainder of discrepancy isolated to hard
resets issued during running.

  Subsystem   Description                             Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  TRIG        Restore RCT for Physics                     March       done
  TRIG        Stage 2 Layer 1 ready for                         
              Med. Lumi. Physics                          April       done
  TRIG        Commision Stage 2 Layer 1 for                     
              High Lumi. Physics                            Dec 
  TRIG        CSCTF Ready for physics                     April       done
  TRIG        Ship one uTCA Muon Sorter to CERN           April       done
  TRIG        Commission initial uTCA Muon Sorter               
              Firmware                                     July 
  TRIG        Commission final uTCA Muon Sorter                 
              Firmware (Ghostbusting)                       Dec 

  : Trigger Milestones

\[TriggerMilestones\]

  Frac of MPC Channels                              100%
  ------------------------------------------------ ------
  Frac of Upgrade EMUTF Channels                    100%
  Frac of deadtime attributed to Upgrade EMUTF      1.3%
  Frac of Stage-2 Layer-1 Channels                  100%
  Frac of deadtime attributed to Stage 2 Layer 1     0%

  : Trigger Metrics

\[TriggerMetrics\]
