\clearpage

# Program Manager's Summary

During this quarter, the first quarter of  **calendar year 2017** (2017Q1), the
LHC was in an extended year-end technical stop (EYETS), giving CMS opportunity
for major repairs and installation of detector replacements and upgrading
detector components.

The primary goal for the EYETS is the installation of a completely new pixel detector, with U.S. CMS having responsibility for the forward pixel detector component (FPIX). The EYETS also allowed for the installation of the forward hadron calorimiter (HF) upgrade, and for extensive repairs of other subsystems.  Recommissioning of the whole detector and readout started in March with so-called Global Runs that allowed recording of cosmic data.

Computing facilities were in heavy use, to support processing and analysis of data taken during the 2016 run, with large peaks of activities related to the preparation of results for the March "winter conferences". As reported previously, the 2016 proton-proton run resulted in 30% more data than originally projected, resulgin in additional stresses on computing systems to deal with the additional data. However, U.S. Facilities performed well, allowing the data samples to be prepared in time for data analysis for the conference results. The technical stop also allowed transitioning of important computing systems to new version, in particular installation of the Singularity virtualization layer on US facilities, decommissioning of the Fermilab LPC BlueArc storage system and replacing it with NSF mounted disk arrays, retiring of obsolete information systems (GIP/BDII) and incorporating a more efficient compression algorithm in ROOT.

Regarding CMS demographics, in 2017 the U.S. fraction of PhD Physicists in CMS, and thus the expected U.S. share to M&O Cat-A cost, remains almost constant with respect to 2016. DOE supports 308 individuals or 22% of the CMS total, the NSF supports 75 individuals or 5.4%, and DOE Nuclear 27 or 2% of the total. There are also 11 individuals at U.S. CMS institutions that have support for M&O-A through other funding sources. The overall fraction of U.S. PhD physicists in CMS is 30.0%

The project office has developed a workflow for a Risk Management Plan, which is being put in place during this quarter. This is described in the Resource Manager's section of this report.
