# Detector Operations

During this quarter the LHC has been in an Extended Year End Technical
Stop (EYETS). For the CMS experiment a primary goal for the EYETS is the
installation of a completely new pixel system. The extended stop has
also allowed for the installation of the HF detector upgrade and for
extensive repairs to other subsystems. Since the experiment has been
involved in technical work we will not report performance metrics this
quarter as they are somewhat meaningless at this time.

BRIL
----

During the EYETS two dead telescopes in one quadrant of the PLT were
scheduled for repair. The detector was successfully extracted and
tested, and the dead telescopes were identified, though the cause of
failure is not completely established. The original failures occurred
after temperature cycling in the CMS detector. Cold-cycle tests with
spare components are ongoing.The critical parts are the port cards and
the hub on the optical motherboard. Replacement parts were available; we
are now out of spares for the opto-motherboard hub chip. The two PLT
halves were re-istalled successfully. Two telescopes of the 16 show
partial failure in the readout that could not be recovered yet. The
precision of the luminosity measurement with the PLT is not expected to
reduce significantly when masking out those two telescopes. The BCM1F
detector has been remodeled and re-installed together with the PLT. The
detectors are currently calibrated. Software for automatic online
corrections such as efficiency and tracks not from the interaction point
is commissioned.

  Subsystem   Description                   Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- --------------------------- ----------- ----------
  BRIL        Update Lumi for 2016            March 1    March 1
  BRIL        Ready for Physics                 May 1
  BRIL        Improve 2017 Lumi numbers         Dec 1

  : BRIL Milestones

Tracker
-------

The tracker system is on track to be ready for proton physics.

### Pixels

This quarter the Phase0 pixel detector was removed and the Phase1 pixel
detector was installed. Both the Forward and the Barrel show about 97%
of chanels present, and the decision was made to close CMS. The
detectors are currently doing calibrations to prepare for taking cosmic
rays for detector alignment prior to proton physics. Tests are also
being performed to ensure the pixel detector operates correctly with the
rest of CMS.

### Strips

At the end of the quarter, the Silicon Strip detector is on and cold.
The full set of calibrations done to prepare for running show no
surprises. Initial rates and behaviors of cosmic rays in the strips are
as expected.

  Subsystem   Description                          Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ---------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 0 Detector Removed          Feb 15     Jan 23
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 Detector Installed        Mar 30     Mar 12
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 Detector                         
              Ready for Collisions                     May 5 

  : Tracker Milestones

ECAL
-----

In January and February all 136 MARATON low voltage supplies were
equipped with a redundant thermal interlock. This followed an incident
in July of 2016 when a component failure resulted in overheating and the
thermal interlock failed. Only the timely intervention of on-call US
staff prevent a major incident. The MARATONS were removed from P6,
transported to Prevessin, upgraded, transported to Meyrin, tested and
validated and returned to P6. This was a labor intensive activity that
occupied our staff fully during these months. All units were successful
upgraded and are fully operational. The laser calibration system
underwent routine maintenance and both lasers are fully operational. In
March the global runs started and the ECAL team went through the usual
procedure to bring ECAL into operation after routine firmware upgrades
to the DAQ and trigger system. At the end of March the system was fully
operational.

  Subsystem   Description                      Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------------ ----------- ----------
  ECAL        Refurbish Maraton to provide               
              redundant thermal interlock        March 1 
  ECAL        Replace Laser Diode                March 1 
  ECAL        Ready for Beam                       May 1 
  ECAL        Preliminary Calibration            June 15 

  : ECAL Milestones

HCAL
----

During the first quarter of 2017, the HCAL Operations group focused on
installing the HF and partial HE Phase I upgrades during the 2016-2017
Extended Year-End Technical Stop (EYETS).

For HF, the upgrade consists of installing dual-anode readout which will
add discrimination to reject spurious signals affecting one anode, with
the ability to recover energy measurement from other anode. New
front-end electronics was also installed to support increased number of
channels. The old QIE8s (7bit ADC) were replaced with QIE10s (8bit ADC).
The new front-end electronics also has an embedded TDC which will be
used to discriminate physics signals from showers in the HF calorimeter
from spurious signals due to Cerenkov light from particles directly
hitting the photo-tube windows.

All the components for the HF upgrades were installed ahead of schedule
by mid-March. The Co$^{60}$ sourcing for calibration of the HF minus end
was completed the week of March 17. The Co$^{60}$ sourcing for
calibration of the HF Plus end was completed March 3. Trigger primitive
commissioning is in progress, and is on schedule to be complete in time
for beam.

For HE, the plan was to install SiPMs and upgraded frontend electronics
in entire HE during the EYETS. However, it was decided in January not to
do complete the upgrade this year due to concerns over firmware
readiness. Nevertheless, one upgraded HE readout box (out of 36) was
installed to obtain experience with upgraded system. The upgraded HE
readout box is operating well, and will remain in place during the 2017
run. A similar small HF upgrade installation was done last year, and the
experience gained with the upgraded system informed this year’s HF EYETS
work. The firmware and software for “mixed” HE system is progressing
well, and the Co$^{60}$ sourcing for calibration for entire HE is
complete.

One particularly bad HE hydrid photo-diode (HPD) was replaced with
better HPD that was originally in readout box that was replaced with the
upgrade electronics. The result is that a large fraction of the detector
response at high eta in this region has been recovered. This helps
confirm the hypothesis that some of the observed signal loss in HE is
likely due to HPD aging as well as radiation damage.

Planning to install the complete HE upgrade in 2017-18 YETS in progress.
No show-stoppers have been found in completing the installation during
that shutdown which will be shorter than this year’s EYETS.

  Subsystem   Description                  Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------- ----------- ----------
  HCAL        HF Phase 1 Installed           April 1   March 15
  HCAL        HF Detector Commissioned        June 1 
  HCAL        Ready for Physics               June 1 

  : HCAL Milestones

EMU
---

A vigorous program of maintenance and repair to the CSC system has been
carried out during the EYETS.

The main activity was the preventive maintenance on the cooling system
of the ME1/1 chambers. Each chamber was extracted and the brazed joints
of the cooling pipes were reinforced. The chambers were subsequently
reinserted and tested for gas, cooling, and connectivity of the
electronics before going through test runs with cosmic rays. By 22
March, all 72 chambers had been reinforced and reinstalled and all were
verified as working in cosmic ray runs. These chambers have been
integrated into global runs and are operating steadily.

As the ME1/1 chambers were extracted, the opportunity was used to
replace any faulty electronics board or fix any faulty connections. In
total, 14 Digital Cathode Front End Boards (DCFEBs) and one Anode Local
Charged Track board (ALCT) were replaced. After completion of the ME1/1
repairs, access to Station 2 is anticipated, where a few electronics
repairs are needed.

  ----------- ----------------------- ----------- ----------
  Subsystem   Description               Scheduled   Achieved
  EMU         CSC ready for physics         May 1 
  EMU         Firmware to mitigate                
              DCFEB EPROM problem          July 1 
  EMU         New HV settings for                 
              reduced gain               August 1 
  ----------- ----------------------- ----------- ----------

  : EMU Milestones

DAQ
---

The main focus during EYETS was the commissioning of the new FEROL40
boards to read out the new Pixel detector. All boards were installed and
the DAQ and TCDS links and run-control interfaces for the new pixel
detector were commissioned. Forward Pixel detector is routinely being
read out in global runs while commissioning of the Barrel Pixel detector
continues with minidaq setup.

An Expanded Event Builder was demonstrated to handle event sizes expected at a luminosity of $2.25 \times 10^{34}$ (corresponding to pile of 70 Events) at 100 kHz level-1 accept rate (see figure {@fig:daq}.)

![FED-builder measurements for two assumptions about expected FED sizes for 2017. Black points: HF subsystem saturates the 10 Gb links at 100 kHz Blue points: Using FED sizes from 2016 scale to Higher Luminosities.  Limit of 148 kHz comes from Calorimeter Trigger FED which sends a fixed fragment size of 7985 Bytes.](figures/ppFedBuilder_new.png){#fig:daq}

Most of the planned improvements and consolidation activities during
EYETS have been completed. The DAQ is being used during Mid-Week Global
Runs, in test stands, and DAQ integration and commissioning tests
successfully. A proof of principle system to validate the architecture
of the new WBM (called the Online Monitoring System - OMS) is on track
to meet its milestone.

New HLT nodes as part of the replacement campaign were ordered. The new
nodes will increase the HLT CPU power by 20%. The preparation of the
racks for power and network have started.

  Subsystem   Description                        Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  DAQ         New sub-systems integrated             Apr 1 
  DAQ         Event builder expanded,                      
              re-optimized for larger events        June 1 
  DAQ         Old HLT Nodes replaced                       
              and new nodes commissioned            June 1 
  DAQ         Prototype of OMS (new WBM)                   
              ready for field tests                 Dec 31 

  : DAQ Milestones

Trigger
-------

During this quarter the US groups continued their work on the Stage-2
Layer-1 Calorimeter (CaloL1) Trigger Upgrade, and the endcap muon
trigger upgrade systems as both prepared for data-taking later rhis
year.

### Regional Calorimeter Trigger and Stage-2 Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger

The Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger (CaloL1), built by the University of
Wisconsin - Madison, is a part of the complete Calorimeter Phase-1
Trigger Upgrade. CaloL1 was powered-on for 2017 running on the 30th of
January. CaloL1 participated in three half-week global runs in February
and March and started 24/7 operation on 27 March. In between global runs
CaloL1 worked with HCAL, helping diagnose issues on the trigger links
associated with the upgraded front-end for HCAL Endcap +17 and the HF.
The scaling back of the HCAL Endcap Front-End upgrade has required only
swapping 2 HCAL fibers at CaloL1 due to the $\mu$HTR firmware mapping
change, and has been completed.

### Endcap Muon Trigger

The Rice University, Northeastern, and University of Florida groups have
worked on planned improvements and required consolidations during the
initial period of the extended year-end technical stop (EYETS). The
fibers coming from the RPC trigger system via the Beijing CPPF data
concentrator cards have been connected to the EMTF optical patch panel,
and from there to the EMTF processors. All links have been successfully
tested. The addition of the RPC hits to the track-finding logic has been
completed in the EMTF firmware. A global data-taking run in mid-March
took place, with RPC hits observed in the EMTF DAQ readout. Adjustments
to the synchronization of the hits with respect to CSC hits are in
progress. The online DQM software is under revision to add additional
monitoring plots of the RPC inputs to the EMTF. Changes to the offline
software emulator of the EMTF, including the addition of RPC hits, is in
progress. Similarly, a new training of the PT assignment for the EMTF PT
LUTs using the RPC hits is in progress.

  Subsystem   Description                        Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- -------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  TRIG        EMTF commissioned with                       
              endcap RPC input                     April 1 
  TRIG        EMTF ready for Physics                 May 1 
  TRIG        Calo Layer 1 commissioned                    
              with new ECAL/HCAL/HF Calib          April 1 
  TRIG        Calo Layer 1 Ready for physics       April 1 

  : Trigger Milestones


