\newpage

# Program Manager's Summary

During this second quarter of **calendar year 2015** (2015Q2) CMS operations transitioned from the end of the long shutdown (LS1) to the start of Run 2. After a series of commissioning runs, physics data taking began in June. Leading up to that, CMS had been busy with commissioning deliverables of the detector improvement program during LS1, getting the detector, readout and data processing ready to take high-quality data efficiently, and finishing a program of work in software and computing to prepare for the startup of CMS data taking.

The path to first LHC collisions was not entirely smooth, but ultimately successful. Repeated beam aborts in one LHC machine sector (15R8) were traced to a "ULO" (Unidentified Lying Object) that is located within one specific magnet. The beam could be steered around it and the ULO location is stable enough that it does not significantly impact LHC operations. A number of other issues were resolved, including a magnet earth fault that was blasted away by running a high current. The LHC physics program then began with initially low luminosity and special runs, at 50 ns bunch crossing, proceeding to the intensity ramp up, before switching to 25 ns bunch crossing planned to start in the summer.

In this quarter CMS developed a serious problem with operating the magnet. In April for some time the magnet cryogenics team (the CERN CMS/TE group) has been struggling with clogging of filters in the refrigerating unit ("cold box") used to liquify helium to cool the superconducting CMS solenoid, supposedly caused by a larger-than-expected amount of as of yet unidentified pollutants in the system. There are indications that the contamination is Breox oil (which is used in the pumping system), traces of which were found in the turbine pre-filters. In addition carbon dust coming from a large absorber operating at a temperature of 80 Kelvin was found in the filters downstream of that absorber.

In April the decision was taken to warm up and open the cold box to replace the filters. This implied that no cold box operation was possible for weeks and thus no operation of the CMS magnet. This was the beginning of an extended series of filter performance studies, replacements and cleaning, and a sequence of cold box recycling operations (flushing the system with Helium at higher temperatures). It led to a situation where CMS had to start physics operations without the magnetic field on, and subsequently to periods of no field during LHC luminosity while the cold box needed to be recycled. This impacted CMS' ability to fully participate in the initial running period at 50 ns bunch crossing. 

## Summary of CMS Activities During this Quarter

Regarding improvements and repairs to the detector, CMS completed its shutdown activities, and closed up the detector. A number of milestones achieved and deliverables finished are listed below in this report, showing that the LS1 detector improvement program was delivered successfully. 

In the BRIL area, the pixel luminosity telescope (PLT) was successfully commissioned and is now being used as the primary luminosity monitor for the experiment. The Tracker Strip and Pixel detectors were calibrated, including  bias and timing scans. ECAL is running smoothly and readout timing was checked and adjusted using beam splashes and first collision events. HCAL has participated fully in collisions with upgraded $\mu$TCA back-end in the HF, delivering good quality data. The endcap muon CSC systems were timed in and checked with collision data, and the timing calibration obtained in beam splash events and beam halo events etc. were found close to optimal. Installation of new DAQ including new HLT nodes was completed and routinely used in data taking with beam and cosmic runs. For the regional calorimeter and the endcap muon triggers, significant progress was made timing in the various elements using beam collisions. 

Software and computing upgrades were also delivered on time for data taking, and the new and updated components are being used by the production teams and a large and increasing number of data analysis users. This includes the data management systems, the workflow management tools, the job scheduling environment, the analysis job submission, and the monitoring systems.

Thus, when LHC started to provide collision data at 13 TeV, CMS was ready to begin data taking at good efficiency, and efficiency was further improved steadily over the initial data taking period. 

Regarding preparations for the high-luminosity LHC upgrade (HL-LHC), CMS submitted the Phase 2 Upgrade Technical Proposal to the LHCC, with strong U.S. contributions. Another important milestone this quarter was that CMS management decided on the choice of calorimeter technology for the endcap. The decision was taken against the Shashlik Calorimeter technology, and for the proposal of building a so-called "High Granularity Calorimeter" based on silicon readout with a scintillator-based backing hadron calorimeter. U.S. groups were strongly contributing to both proposals.

This was decided by CMS management (spokesperson and deputies, upgrade and technical coordinator) with input from a report by a down-select committee that had been charged to carefully study the proposals, and that presented its findings and comments in April. The committee was charged to evaluate a number of criteria, in particular the calorimetric performance and benefit to physics analysis, technical feasibility, integration into CMS, operations issues, the scale of effort for R\&D and construction, and validity of cost estimates of either proposal. 

The report  proposed a list of major criteria to be considered in the selection of one design and included an evaluation of the technical and schedule risks. CMS management decided to select the HGCal proposal, and that decision was endorsed by the CMS Collaboration Board in May.

Although the Shashlik Calorimeter proposal is not moving ahead, CMS encouraged the groups involved --- including a number of U.S. institutions --- to continue an effort within the next year to carry out a targeted and limited continuation of the R&D that includes additional:

- measurements needed to certify radiation hardness of the key optical components,
- engineering studies to certify the usage of capillaries, 
- R&D to define Quality Assurance/Quality Control necessary to construct such a device.

The goal is to capture those aspects of the R&D that might be useful for future experiments and can be accomplished with the limited resources available. U.S. CMS Operations Program Management asked the U.S. groups involved in Shashlik Calorimeter R&D to provide a plan for this limited continuation of R&D to close out those efforts. 

Closing out the analysis of Run 1 data taken in 2011 (5 fb$^{-1}$ at 7 TeV) and 2012 (20 fb$^{-1}$ at 8 TeV) proceeded and by the end of the quarter CMS had submitted some 375 papers for publication. One of these marked a particularly visible milestone with the publication of the joint article between CMS and LHCb, on the *Observation of the rare $B^0_s \to \mu^+\mu^−$ decay from the combined analysis of CMS and LHCb data* in [Nature](http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/ nature14474.html).

In summary, during this quarter U.S. CMS made significant progress in physics analysis and publications of existing data, in detector operations, in upgrades and R&D. CMS was successfully commissioned and ready for the start of LHC Run 2, and physics data taking started.
