# HL-LHC Upgrade R&D

During this quarter, the HL-LHC High-Luminosity LHC ("Phase 2") endcap calorimetry down-select decision was made by the CMS collaboration.  To cover the pseudorapidity region from 1.5 to 3.0, the high granularity electromagnetic (HGCal) plus the hadronic (FH and BH) calorimeter system was selected.  As outlined in the CMS Technical Proposal ([LHCC-P-008](https://cds.cern.ch/record/2020886?ln=en)[^ref-tp]) the HGCal incorporates a silicon/tungsten sampling electromagnetic section followed by two hadronic sections: a front one, FH, with silicon sensors and a back one, BH, using plastic scintillator, each with brass absorber.  For the endcap region, this design should provide excellent calorimetry in a very challenging environment of high pileup and substantial radiation exposure.  The U.S. groups play strong roles in this R&D and will contribute key facets of the construction.  As a result of the decision, the operations program subsequently provided additional R&D funds to the principal US groups, UCSB, Minnesota, FNAL, and Maryland, and to the CERN Team Account, for the remainder of 2015.  

[^ref-tp]: CMS Technical Proposal available at https://cds.cern.ch/record/2020886

The other electromagnetic calorimetry technology previously under consideration, the Shashlik design, will not be considered further for the CMS HL-LHC upgrade.  Nevertheless, at the time of the downselect, the collaboration strongly endorsed an appropriate close out of Shashlik R&D so that key elements of the design could be evaluated and the results published.  After discussing the close out plan with the Shashlik leaders, the U.S. CMS Operations Program provides some additional funding for this effort to the four main groups involved, Notre Dame, Virginia, CalTech, and Iowa. 

Also during this period, the Project Manager for U.S. CMS HL-LHC project, Vivian O’Dell (Fermilab), appointed Level-2 managers.  For the large tracker project, including the forward pixels, outer tracker, and track trigger, Karl Ecklund (Rice U.) and Chris Hill (OSU) will serve as joint Level-2 managers.  Jeremy Mans (U.Minnesota) is the Level-2 manager for endcap calorimetry, Colin Jessop (Notre Dame U.) is Level-2 manager for barrel calorimetry, along with Alexei Safonov (Texas A&M U.) for the muon systems, and Jeff Berryhill (Fermilab) for the trigger system.  The Level-2 manager for DAQ is yet to be named.  Anders Ryd (Cornell U.) serves as deputy project manager for the HL-LHC upgrade.


