\clearpage

# Detector Operations

Long shutdown 2 of the LHC (LS2) is now well underway. During this shutdown a number of detector improvements are planned, including new electronics for some muon chambers and the installation and commissioning of the hadronic calorimeter barrel upgrade. An extensive program of routine maintenance tasks is also underway.

## BRIL

During LS2 the plan is to rebuild the Pixel Luminosity Telescope detectors used in the BRIL system. Progress this quarter included the acquisition and testing of readout components. Two labs were established at CERN, at Point 5 and in the Tracker Integration Facility. Detector planes (sensors) for the first replacement PLT have been tested. For a second version more planes will be bump bonded; low quality tested planes have been sent back to PSI. The production of the re-designed opto-motherboards started; the first two boards arrived and are under investigation. Problems with the availability of Digital Optiacl Hybrids (DOHs) are still a concern, but enough DOHs are secured for one full replacement PLT. Furthermore, additional DOHs from the phase 0/1 pixel detector have been secured, and for a subset the connectors have been exchanged. An attenuation test stand is setup to perform quality tests as they are irradiated and their degradation needs to be quantified.

The study of the extracted PLT is ongoing. The failure of the telescope readout in one of the quarters when cooled below 5\textdegree C can be reproduced.  Cold tests for the replacement PLT are in preparation. One quarter plus full readout will be placed in a freezer box.

The luminosity analysis for the 2018 data taking has been completed and approved.

  -----------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------ ----------- ----------
  BRIL        Assembly of the               Jun 30
              replacement PLT - first
              quarter

  BRIL        Cold cycle tests done -       Aug 31
              one quarter

  BRIL        Assemble quarters 2,3,4       Sep 30

  BRIL        Certify quarters for          Nov 31
              full assembly

  BRIL        Mechanical assembly for       Dec 31
              PLT ready (store in cold
              boxes)

  BRIL        Full Run 2 Luminosity         Dec 31
              analysis /software
              review
  -----------------------------------------------------------

  : BRIL 2019 Upgrade Milestones

## Tracker

The LS2 program began on schedule with the extraction of the pixel detector from CMS.

### Pixels

The pixel detector was successfully extracted from CMS on January 10-15 and placed in storage boxes that are being kept near 0\textdegree C. So far, the only detector refurbishments that have occurred are the removal of all BPIX DC-DC converters and the removal of BPIX Layer 1. The DC-DC converters are being tested to better understand the failure mode that appeared in October 2017 and the successful operations in 2018. The BPiX Layer 1 is being rebuilt with new modules that have upgraded versions of both the PROC600 readout chip (ROC) and the token bit manager (TBM).

The latest version of the PROC600 ROC has lower crosstalk that should allow for lower operational thresholds, leading to better sensitivity to small deposited charges. The latest version of the TBM corrects a vulnerability to single event upsets (SEUs) discovered in summer 2017.  In the new version, SEU recovery can be done with a fast TBM reset that does not require cycling the DC-DC converter. The improved SEU recovery, as well as improvements in the data handling circuitry and a provision to correct a mismatched delay between the PSI46dig ROC and the PROC600 chips that should lead to higher tracking and operational efficiency in the BPiX. SEU recovery with the new TBM was tested in a 60 MeV sulphur ion beam and a 30 MeV oxygen ion beam at Florida State University (FSU).  The exposed TBM operated without needing power cycling and the new reset was tested successfully. More SEU testing at FSU and total dose testing with the Sandia Cobalt source will done.

In 2018 it was observed that some layer 1 modules broke after being operated at elevated high voltage (600V). The source of this problem was traced to a short that developed when the sensor bias was too high between the sensor and a nearby metallic test pad kept at low voltage.  The sensor-pad gap in the new modules is three times wider than in the old modules, which fixes the problem.

The DAQ team has been working on software improvements for Run 3. The user interface to the PixelSupervisor has been cleaned up, the SEU recovery workloop has been updated, and state transition implementations improved where needed. Similar work will continue throughout LS2.

As a final note, the Phase 0 detector was successfully returned to Fermilab after all potentially usable parts were removed.

### Strips

The main goals for operations of the silicon strip detector are to see if it can operate well at a reduced temperature (-25\textdegree C) and to regularly exercise the detector to monitor sensor condition, take cosmic data, and exercise the DAQ. In this quarter, the tracker volume humidity seal was restored after the pixel removal, and Strips participated in global DAQ operations with power (and cooling) on at the end of March.

  Subsystem   Description                         Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- --------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  Tracker     Pixel Phase 1 Detector Removed         Jan 31     Jan 15
  Tracker     Strips cold and in global run          June 1     Mar 20
  Tracker     Strips tested at -25C                  Dec 11
  Tracker     Pixel initial checkout complete        Aug 31

  : Tracker 2019 Milestones


## ECAL

The ECAL LS2 work is proceeding according to schedule. The replacement of the MARATON cooling lines has been completed ahead of schedule. The modification of the CANBUS and DCS software update has also been completed ahead of schedule. The laser maintenance is pushed back in order to keep operating the laser in the first quarter of 2019 to study the crystal recovery from radiation damage. The new milestone is Sep 30 for the first laser and Dec 31 for the second laser. The infrastructure update of the laser barracks has begun.

  -----------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------ ----------- ----------
  ECAL        Complete First Laser          Sep 30
              Maintenance               (April 30)

  ECAL        Complete Second Laser         Dec 31
              Maintenance                (July 31)

  ECAL        Complete infrastructure       Dec 31
              update of laser barracks

  ECAL        Complete replacement of      June 30    April 1
              all Maraton input/output
              Cooling Pipes

  ECAL        Complete replacement of      Sept 30
              input HV power
              connectors

  ECAL        Complete modification of      Oct 31    April 1
              CANBUS and update DCS
              software

  ECAL        Complete VME PC               Mar 31   March 15
              replacement 

  ECAL        Complete network upgrade      May 31

  ECAL        Complete upgrade to           Dec 31
              XDAQ15

  ECAL        Complete installation of      Aug 31
              new water pump at
              surface

  ECAL        Complete insulation of        Dec 31
              surface to underground
              area pipes
  -----------------------------------------------------------

  : ECAL 2019 Milestones

## HCAL

During the first quarter of 2019, the HCAL Operations group focused on completing the remaining components of the HCAL Barrel (HB) Phase 1 Upgrade electronics and on beginning the HB Phase 1 Upgrade installation.

### HB Installation and Commissioning

The HB Phase 1 upgrade, planned for LS2, is progressing well. The necessary parts have arrived at CERN and assembly and testing of the readout modules and other components. is proceeding. More than 170 readout modules have been assembled and tested. (144 are needed in P5 for the detector. The others will be spares and used in test stands.) The installation readiness review (IRR) for HB installation took place as scheduled on February 15, 2019, and the "go ahead" was given to begin installing the upgrade. The removal of the Phase 0 electronics from the HB readout boxes began a few days later. Note that the plan was for the HB Minus half-barrel upgrade to be installed February through June 2019 while the HB Plus half-barrel upgrade will be installed from September through December 2019. Two wedges (HBM10 and HBM11) have had Phase 1 electronics fully installed. The installation time was as expected, adding confidence to schedule projections. Co60 sourcing was done with the legacy electronics so that comparisons between Phase 0 and Phase 1 performance can be made. These two wedges with the new electronics have now been scanned with the Co60 source and the expected performance improvements achieved. In addition, HBM11 was included in global running with cosmic rays in late March and cosmic signals were seen, indicating that the new electronics is performing well.

Two issues came up during the burn-in of the Phase 1 HB electronics. The first is that a number of the SiPM control card mezzanines were of sub-standard quality due to issues with the assembly process. The decision was made to re-make the boards at Fermilab. The production of the new boards is complete and they arrived at CERN March 30. After testing, they will be installed in readout modules. The second is that a number of SiPM mounting boards showed an increase in leakage current when being burned-in. The affected channels were near the edges of the boards. The problem has been identified. An improved design has been reviewed and endorsed. The RFQ for the modified boards is being prepared at Fermilab with delivery expected in late-May.

Even with these two issues, it is expected that the HB Phase 1 Upgrade installation can be completed by the end of 2019.

In Table @tbl:HBUpgradeMilestones, all HB upgrade electronics related items are abbreviated "HBE".

### HCAL Operations

Although the HCAL generally performed well during the 2018 running, there were two significant issues. First, there was an over voltage transient that occurred during the the power-on of CAEN A3100HBP modules on June 30 after a CERN wide power cut that caused irreversible damage of two sectors on the HE minus side, HEM15 and HEM16. Second, HCAL experienced disruptions to the quality of specific primary control links between the front-end controllers (FECs) in the CMS service cavern and the clock, control, and monitoring modules (CCMs) on the detector for HEP10 and HEM9. Redundant (secondary) control links were enabled for these detectors and allowed HCAL to continue taking high quality data.  The affected electronics for HEM15 and HEM16 as well as HEP10 and HEM9 have now been removed from the detector. The DC/DC converters on HEM15 and HEM16 were found to be damaged and these modules have now been successfully repaired. Work on the HEP10 and HEM9 CCMs is in progress.  The low voltage power supplies will be shipped back to CAEN for modification to prevent future over voltage transients during power-on and a protection circuits for both HE and HB will be designed and installed during 2019. (An ad-hoc protection circuit was quickly added to HE after the June 30 incident to prevent problems from transients.)

Also, the FEC and CCM firmware is being upgraded to be compatible with half-speed control links. This will ease timing and decrease the Single Event Upset probability.

  Subsystem   Description                                     Scheduled      Achieved
  ----------- ------------------------------------------- ------------- -------------
  HCAL        HBE assembly starts at CERN                    1-Sep-2018    1-Sep-2018
  HCAL        HBE production in "factory mode"              15-Nov-2018   20-Nov-2018
  HCAL        HBE IRR passed                                15-Feb-2019   15-Feb-2019
  HCAL        HBE Minus end upgrade installation begins     19-Feb-2019   18-Feb-2019
  HCAL        HBE production complete                       28-Feb-2019      see text
  HCAL        HBE Minus end Upgrade Complete                30-Jun-2019
  HCAL        HBE Plus end upgrade installation begins       1-Sep-2019
  HCAL        HBE Plus end Upgrade Complete                 20-Dec-2019

  : HB Upgrade Milestones {#tbl:HBUpgradeMilestones}

  Subsystem   Description                                         Scheduled      Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------------------- ------------- -------------
  HCAL        extract HEM09 and HEP10 CCMs                      10-Feb-2019   30-Jan-2019
  HCAL        extract HEM15 and HEM16 CCMs, RMs, CUs            15-Mar-2019   30-Jan-2019
  HCAL        finalize half-speed FEC and CCM firmware           1-Apr-2019   15-Mar-2019
  HCAL        reinstall HEM09, HEP10 modules                     1-Jun-2019
  HCAL        reinstall HEM15, HEM16 modules                     1-Jun-2019
  HCAL        recommission HE with half-speed control links      1-Jun-2019
  HCAL        LV PS back to CAEN for modification starts         1-Jun-2019
  HCAL        new LV protection circuits installed               1-Sep-2019

  : 2019 HCAL Operations Milestones

## EMU

The major CSC activity planned for Long Shutdown 2 is the refurbishment of 180 chambers in the inner rings of the CSC system with updated electronics. Chambers are extracted from CMS and brought to the surface at SX5 where the older electronics boards are stripped off and new ones are being installed. The refurbished chambers are subjected to a battery of tests in an electronics tests stand in SX5, and then monitored under power on a long-term-test stand. After a leak test of the cooling circuits, the chambers are reinstalled in CMS and await recommissioning. The work of chamber refurbishment and testing, infrastructure installation and re-commissioning is distributed among small teams that are composed mostly of graduate students and are led by senior scientists or postdocs.

In January and February, the refurbishment and testing area in SX5 underwent final preparations. This CSC area in SX5 is maintained as a radiation protection (RP) supervised area; the extracted chambers have a low level of radioactivity (less than 0.1 $\mu$Sv/hr), but they must be stored and worked on in a RP area. One wall of the area was moved outward by one meter to extend the area available for chamber storage.  We also completed the storage racks that hold the chambers vertically and a set of wheeled tables that hold the chambers horizontally while they are being refurbished and tested. Two complete independent tests stands were established, complete with low voltage, high voltage, gas, cooling, and VME electronics. An additional long term test stand was completed with a capacity for three chambers and the necessary safety features to operate in unattended mode. The hardware and software for the test stands was refined and debugged and the operation of the stands was validated in mid February.

The first ring of chambers to be refurbished is ME-1/1 (the inner ring of the first station on the negative YE-1 end cap), which comprises 36 chambers. The chambers in this ring require the old digital cathode front end boards (DCFEBs) to be replaced with new DCFEBv2 boards, and the ALCT mezzanines to be replaced with new ALCT LX100 boards. Each DCFEBv2 also requires a copper cooling cover and thermal padding for good thermal contact to the highest power components.

Large-scale assembly of the DCFEBv2 boards began in January. After assembly, the boards are shipped to Ohio State university where they undergo bench tests. They are shipped to CERN in batches of 10 to 40 boards, where they undergo and additional tests of the GBTx communications chip and the parameters of the GBTx are fused. By March 7, enough fully tested boards were available at CERN to be used for chamber electronics refurbishment. As of the end of March, 289 boards have been produced and 280 of these shipped to CERN. For the ME-1/1 ring, 252 boards are needed; the remainder are not needed until November when the ME+1/1 chambers are scheduled to be extracted. The quality of the boards is very high. Only five boards have been set aside for more debugging; all others are working.

The ALCT LX100 boards began large-scale production in February. After assembly, the boards are shipped to UCLA for bench testing, then shipped to CERN. By March 7, enough ALCT LX100 boards were tested and available at CERN to keep up with refurbishment. As of the end of March, all 36 boards needed for ME-1/1 are at CERN. The ME2/1, ME3/1, ME4/1 rings use a different version of the boards (ALCT LX150T) with a more powerful version of the Spartan-6 FPGA. These boards underwent successful pre-series tests in March and should begin production in April.

The first ME-1/1 chamber was extracted on 25 Feb, and extraction continued thereafter at one-to-two chambers per day. As of the end of March, all 36 ME-1/1 chambers have been extracted, 19 of these have had new electronics installed, five have undergone and passed electronics testing, two have had the additional long term test, and one has been reinstalled on the detector. The operation has achieved a steady-state throughput of one-to-two chambers per day, and is on track to complete the full re-installation of ME-1/1 before the scheduled end of access to this ring in early June.

The copper covers and thermal pads experienced serious procurement delays; the main order of copper arrived only in late March and the thermal pad order is not anticipated until June. In each case, we were able to procure small quantities or borrow material from other subsystems in order to avoid an impact on the refurbishment schedule.

The assembly of the new low-voltage junction boxes was completed in January. Of the 36 new boxes 18 have now been installed on the detector. The final set of 12 additional Maraton low voltage supplies arrived at CERN in March.

The new optical fibers for ME2/1, ME3/1, ME4/1 were shipped to CERN at the end of March.

The old DCFEB boards extracted from ME1/1 will later be installed in ME2/1, ME3/1, ME4/1. Before this, however, they are to have their old Finisar optical transceivers removed and retrofitted with VTTx optical transmitters. This operation is being carried out by our colleagues from Tomsk State University (RU). The extracted DCFEB boards are transported to a radioprotection lab on the CERN Prevessin site where the work is carried out with appropriate radiation controls. Approximately 30 DCFEBs have been retrofitted as of the end of March.

In summary, the main CSC activity of LS2, refurbishment of the inner ring chambers, has reached a steady state and is on schedule.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                           Scheduled Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------- ----------- ------------
  EMU-MEX/1   CSC LV junction boxes ready for          Jan 15 Feb 1
              installation

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME-1/1 chamber extracted to        Feb 25 Feb 25
              SX5

  EMU-MEX/1   CSC DCFEBv2 boards ready for             Mar 11 Mar 7
              installation on ME-1/1

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX100 ready for installation        Mar 11 Mar 7
              in ME-1/1

  EMU-MEX/1   Full production of ALCT-LX150T           Apr 15
              released

  EMU-MEX/1   CSC on-chamber optical fibers ready      Apr 15
              for installation

  EMU-MEX/1   ME-1/1 installed and commissioned         Jun 2

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX150T ready for installation       Jun 10
              in ME+234/1

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME+234/1 chamber extracted to      Jun 17
              SX5

  EMU-MEX/1   New LV power in place for ME+234         Jun 30

  EMU-MEX/1   ALCT-LX100 ready for installation        Jun 30
              on ME2/2,3/2

  EMU-OPS/1   LV power in place for plus end cap        Aug 8

  EMU-OPS/1   Ready to join MWGR with ME-1/1            Sep 1

  EMU-MEX/1   First ME+1/1 chamber extracted to        Oct 28
              SX5

  EMU-OPS/1   Ready to join MWGR with ME+234/1          Nov 1

  EMU-MEX/1   OTMB production complete                 Nov 15
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : EMU 2019 Milestones

## DAQ

The central DAQ system was mostly switched off until March 11 due to the cooling maintenance at Point 5. Only basic IT services, TCDS, selected miniDAQs, and DAQ testbeds were on whenever possible. CERN IT replaced the core network routers in the underground area. This resulted in 2 days without the private CMS network and several short interruptions thereafter. In addition, we operated as many HLT machines as possible in cloud mode to process CMS offline workflows. Since March 26, all current and most of the retired HLT machines are on. They provide 32k physical cores (766 kHS), and process more jobs than all Tier-1s combined. The changing conditions required a lot of attention from the sys-admin team.

The DAQ software was migrated from SVN to git(lab). This transition was imposed by CERN IT as the SVN service was stopped in February. The development teams of the XDAQ and RCMS frameworks took the opportunity to restructure the software repositories, change the build system for RCMS, and embark on the use of continuous integration (CI) to ease release procedures. The F3 monitoring was ported to elasticsearch version 6. All central DAQ machines except for the HLT nodes have been updated to the latest CentOS 7.6 operating system, OFED version and Lustre kernel modules. This transition was completed successfully and the new releases were used for the first MWGR on March 20-22.

The preparation for Run 3 has started with reshuffling of the older generation of HLT nodes which will be operated exclusively in cloud mode from now on. They need to be relocated to make room in the racks that are powered by UPS for the future core services. The daq3val testbed, which provides 100 Gbps Ethernet and Infiniband connections between 16 Skylake event-builder nodes, is used to measure and optimize the event-building performance from the backend interface (FEROL40) to the HLT processing on the filter units. The measurements have confirmed the feasibility of a folded event-builder setup, where the readout and builder executables run on the same machine. This would require half the number of event-builder machines and switch ports. We started to evaluate new hardware for the storage and transfer system. In collaboration with a company, initial measurements have been performed using a benchmark application which emulates the merging and transfer workload.

The OMS project finished the migration of the core pages from the old WBM system that is being replaced. The remaining pages which include HLT information and the run-info table were released in January. The focus has shifted to the support of the subsystem pages. The OMS team worked hard to simplify and document the steps required to create API endpoints and corresponding OMS pages. The development process has been presented at several meetings and a couple of subsystems have started with the transition or the development of new pages. The redesign of the database schema inherited from WBM is in full swing, and stakeholders which need to provide data inputs have been contacted. In addition, we work on a proposal on how the deadtime and downtime shall be accounted for in Run 3. A new scheme needs to be worked out, as the current downtime definition relies on SCAL hardware which will no longer be available.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                    Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ---------------------------- ----------- ----------
  DAQ         Migrated all DAQ s/w to            Feb 1      Feb 1
              gitlab

  DAQ         RCMS and XDAQ releases from       Mar 15     Mar 15
              gitlab deployed

  DAQ         Core XDAQ packages built           Jun 1
              with C++11/14

  DAQ         Evaluated storage-manager          Aug 1
              h/w for Run 3

  DAQ         OMS DB tables fully replace        Oct 1
              legacy tables from WbM/SCAL

  DAQ         Central DAQ hardware choices       Nov 1
              finalized
  ---------------------------------------------------------------

  : DAQ 2019 Milestones

## Trigger

During this quarter the U.S. groups continued their maintenance, operations, and development work on the Layer-1 calorimeter (CaloL1) trigger, endcap muon trigger (EMTF), and global Level-1 trigger systems, as well as on the field operations of the Trigger Studies Group. These preparations will provide improvements and reliable running during Run 3 data taking operations.

### Endcap Muon Trigger

The EMTF groups provided support for the first Midweek Global Run of 2019, although ultimately no endcap muon detector systems were included into the run. In preparation, the online software was updated to the latest version of SWATCH and the latest feature requests from 2018, and the repository was moved to a new centralized project GitLab area.

An EMTF micro-TCA slow control monitoring project is well underway, making use of communication via the IPMI interface. This is a project involving a student working with the University of Florida and another from the University of California, Davis, under the supervision of the University of Florida engineer. The goal is to be able to monitor at a glance through a web page the status of the EMTF links, power, temperatures, etc. Currently a prototype web page is working with dummy data, and next will be the development and test of web socket communication to the system.

A tool to monitor the Level-1 trigger cross sections as a function of pileup has been been developed. One can apply various quality criteria and study the pileup dependence of trigger cross sections (computed from rates and luminosities recorded in the online database). We will see if it can be integrated in a more centralized way for the Trigger project.

Optical cables for the connection between newly installed GE1/1 electronics and the EMTF have been ordered.

### Layer-1 Calorimeter Trigger

During the last quarter of 2018, CaloL1 provided smooth data taking in heavy-ion collisions. The CaloL1 was turned off at the beginning of December 2018 together with the CMS detector. The major activities during the first quarter of 2018 were the preparation for the removal of the old RCT hardware from P5 and utilizations of its parts, and the preparation for the first Midweek Global Run (MWGR), March 20-22. The racks with the old RCT cards were inspected, and the cabling, crates, cards, and power supplies are to be removed from the racks. Part of hardware will be stored in B904 to be used for different projects. The plan for this work is now under discussion. The preparation for the first MWGR 2019 included an update of the SWATCH software and checking different parts of the hardware. The Calo L1 was successfully turned on, optical power on all fibers was checked and some small problems were fixed (fibers with low optical power were cleaned). The system provided smooth operation during MWGR. Some additional work together with central DAQ may be needed for a full update to the most recent SWATCH software implementation, and should be completed/checked by/during the next MWGR.

### Field Operations Group of the Trigger Studies Group

This quarter, the Field Operations Group (FOG) has begun to turn its attention to preparations for Run 3. Notre Dame graduate student Kelci Mohrman has agreed to serve as L3 manager within FOG for the trigger rate monitoring (RateMon) software used both to monitor trigger rates in real time during data taking as well as in data certification for the trigger. We made improvements RateMon focusing on streamlining operational activities, saving more data about the trigger rate fits that are used to determine if the rates are in the acceptable range for a given amount of pileup, and improving the automatic fitting applied to the rate curves so that it now picks the best fit function rather than applying a standard default. These modifications are targeted at improving operational efficiency for Run 3. Mohrman presented RateMon plans at the CMS Level-1 Trigger Workshop and also the High-Level Trigger Workshop, and is now working to identify priorities that need to be addressed in RateMon development in advance of Run 3. A clear priority that has already emerged is the transition from Web-Based Monitoring (WBM) to the new Online Monitoring System (OMS).

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Subsystem   Description                           Scheduled   Achieved
  ----------- ----------------------------------- ----------- ----------
  TRIG        Architecture for bringing GE1/1          Aug 30
              signals to EMTF specified

  TRIG        EMTF online software framework           Aug 30
              extended to include GE1/1

  TRIG        Neural network PT assignment             Dec 31
              implementation into EMTF firmware

  TRIG        Initial algorithm to include GE1/1       Dec 31
              into EMTF

  TRIG        Remove legacy BMTF firmware and          Dec 31
              keep only Kalman filter

  TRIG        Modify the Kalman filter algorithm       Dec 31
              to use the upgraded trigger
              primitives

  TRIG        Deinstall old RCT hardware              Sept 30

  TRIG        Exchange microSDs in all CTP7 cards     Sept 30

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Fix the cable trays in       Sept 30
              P5

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Initial demonstration of       Jul 1
              pileup mitigation algorithms
              involving machine learning using
              High-Level Synthesis

  TRIG        Calo Trig: Performance results of        Dec 31
              pileup mitigation algorithms
              involving machine learning

  TRIG        Assess needs for any rate                Dec 31
              monitoring software developments

  TRIG        Update rate monitoring software to       Dec 31
              adapt to evolution in DAQ
              infrastructure
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Trigger 2019 Milestones

