# Program Manager's Assessment

When in December the LHC Run 2 officially ended after a Heavy Ion running period all LHC goals for luminosity delivered and excellent beam quality were fulfilled. In total during Run 2 LHC delivered an integrated luminosity of 162.85/fb of proton-proton collisions at 13 TeV center-of-mass energy, of which CMS was able to record 150.26/fb. The CMS program thus has achieved the Run 2 luminosity goals.

During this year in 2018 CMS accumulated 63.87/fb of pp collision data and 1.707/nb of lead-lead collisions at 5.02 TeV/nucleon HI data. Data recording efficiency achieved the highest value yet and averaged to 94% over the year. The mean number of interactions per bunch crossing for the 2018 pp run was measured to be an average pile-up of 32.

With the end of Run 2 LHC started the Long Shutdown 2 and CMS will take advantage of this period to do a large number of detector repairs and refurbishments. In particular CMS will complete the Phase 1 upgrade by installing the upgraded HCAL barrel electronics. There will also be significant improvements to the endcap muons system by refurbishing the on-chamber readout and trigger electronics of the innermost set of cathode-strip chambers, and a variety of improvements, consolidations and maintenance across all of the detector.

Operations of the computing systems was generally very successful, with significant progress in preparing data and software releases making available the latest calibration and data quality improvements to data processing for the upcoming winter conferences. Challenges were mostly associated with the high data rates of HI collisions, and they were met thanks to previous experience and careful preparation for this run. Difficulties with the Monte Carlo production system at the end of the previous quarter were resolved, allowing all facilities to return to a level of full utilization.

CMS made good use of the NERSC HPC systems, running full simulation workflows and this way giving some relief to the U.S. CMS production systems and enhancing CMS physics opportunities. The U.S. Tier-1 and Tier-2 facilities were as robust as ever, with high levels of availability to the experiment. All sites made continued progress with a variety of technology upgrades. The most significant of these was the commissioning of a new tape library system at Fermilab, which has proceeded ahead of schedule. The experiment’s computing infrastructure continues to be upgraded, with an increasing use of community- and industry-standard tools.  In particular, CMS is making rapid progress with migration to the Rucio data management system, which was developed for the ATLAS experiment but is now becoming a community project with CMS as one of the major users. A variety of software developments have targeted the improved use of heterogeneous processing architectures, important for the exploitation of HPC and opportunistic computing.

The 2018 spending plan ended this quarter, with a total obligated spending of $35,097,859. Through the year a total of 95 SOWs (61 DOE and 34 NSF) were produced and approved to allocate funding at U.S. CMS universities, Fermilab, and CERN Team Accounts. The quarter had a number of change orders that amounted to just a small overall cost variance, covered by management reserve, of +$84K. The Risk Register was updated as reported in this document. The top risk of EMU - EPROM failures on DCFEBs boards that are exposed to large amounts of radiation will soon be retired with the planned installation of refurbished on-chamber electronics during the coming LS2.

Physics output reached new records in the number of papers published. At the end of the year the number of Run 2 physics publications submitted to journals reached 280, for a total of some 850 CMS physics papers on collider data.

