
# Program Manager's Summary

During this third quarter of promp*calendar year 2015* (2015Q3) CMS was starting physics data taking at increasing LHC luminosities. 

After a series of commissioning runs, physics data taking began in June, with the improved CMS detector and computing systems ready for efficient high-quality data taking. Between June 3, 2015 and October 12, 2015, the LHC delivered 2.5/pb integrated luminosity of proton-proton collisions at a center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV, of which CMS recorded 2.3/pb. 

However, problems with the cryogenic systems for the CMS magnet continued through the quarter. Since March the 'Cold Box' (CB) that liquifies Helium for cooling the CMS superconducting solenoid has shown problems, following an incident where compressor oil contaminated the downstream CB circuits. An overall cleanup would take several months and is being planned for the year-end technical stop. 

Meanwhile, the CERN cryo group, in collaboration with CMS Technical Coordination, has been trying to find a way to operate the CB with a reasonable duty cycle of at least 70% that would allow operation of the CMS magnet synchronized with the physics operation cycles of the LHC.  After a number of corrective actions including replacing filters and thermal recycling of heat exchanges etc, performance of the system has improved and it appears this goal is being met. The impact on useful luminosity for CMS is however significant, and of the 2.3/pb data on tape, approximately 0.40/pb is with the magnetic field off or below  nominal value.

As the LHC settled into stable operations the Operations Program also entered an operational mode. Detector performance metrics have been steadily improving and at the end of the quarter were at an excellent level of >92%, with further improvements continuing. Detailed reports on detector components are given below in the Detector Operations section. 

Operations of central data processing and management systems has become routine, with adjustments as necessary as experience is being gained. Computing operations clearly benefits from the various development efforts carried out during the shutdown. As always, further developments on computing services continued during the quarter, while support for current operations remains top priority. A focus was to make new classes of computing resources available to CMS processing, such as the Amazon cloud, or clusters at supercomputing centers.  CMS software reaps the benefits of the new multi-threaded framework, and development has continued to expand the scope of those gains.  

U.S. computing facilities at Fermilab and universities have seen increasing amounts of activity, both in central processing and user data analysis.  While utilization has been higher than in recent quarters site performance has remained good --- details are given in the Software and Computing section. S&C metrics for 2015 so far are at or above the goal of 98% site readiness for the Tier-1 and 80% site readiness for Tier-2 centers (where the U.S. Tier-2s typically achieve above 95%, for great effectiveness in supporting U.S. physics data analysis).

All computing resources pledged to WLCG for this period of performance are available. This-year's computing hardware upgrade procurements are on track with significant new resources becoming available as they are being commissioned, helping CMS to keep up with the increasing demand as CMS takes more data. The Tier-0 facility was running as expected.

### Spending Plan for 2016

The Resource Manager's section below gives details on how the 2015 spending plan develops. The carry-over of DOE funds between fiscal years was analyzed at the end of the quarter. The FY14 $\to$ FY15 carry-over was $6,320k, including RIPs. This year’s spending plan foresees a carry-over “buffer” from FY15 into FY16 of $3,000k to cover the remaining quarter in the calendar year, some of which is already obligated through POs for CERN team accounts. Furthermore the spending plan foresees to make additional $2,590k of carry-over funds available in 2016, to enable next year's upgrade R&D funding to continue and ramp up. At the end of this quarter and fiscal year, Fermilab reports $4,411k carry-over funds into FY16, which is consistent with the spending plan, and consistent with the goal to spend-down about $2M of previous year's carry-over during FY15. 

We also assessed the effect of fluctuating exchange rates between Swiss Franc (SFR) and U.S. Dollar (USD). About 28% of all expenses for the Operations Program occur in SFR, and given the exchange rate history the 2016 spending plan assumed an exchange rate of 0.9 SFR per 1 USD. The actual average exchange rate for M&O cost and CERN team account invoicing came out to be about 0.96 SFR per 1 USD. This means we realized significant cost savings over the spending plan. In total, these and other cost under-runs balanced out change orders to allocate additional funds for a number of unforeseen items. Examples are increased costs to support CMS coordination (support for the CMS Muon Project Manager and the CMS Trigger Coordinator), the closeout of R&D cost for the Shashlik calorimeter upgrade proposal R&D in 2015/16, and a number of items to support startup of the HL-LHC project organization to support their Level-2 coordinators and travel cost. Details are given in the resource manager's tables. 

Also, cost savings in computing upgrade procurements allowed to buy equipment needed next year, which helps with the planned computing upgrade cost in 2016 and the planned disk procurements for the LPC analysis facility --- these were tentatively planned as possible calls on management reserve, and a change request was put through to move forward with these enhancements of storage capacity for physics data analysis. 


### Resource Allocation Advisory Board

The Operations Program managers together with the HL-LHC upgrade manager have created a Resource Allocation Advisory Board (RAAB) charged with providing advice on questions regarding the allocation of funds between the different activity areas of the program, and on the interplay between the planned HL-LHC upgrade projects, including enabling R&D and pre-construction planning, and the Operations Program. RAAB Membership includes J.Berryhill, P.Bhat and J.Butler (chair) of Fermilab, S.Dasu (USCMS CB chair, observer) from U.Wisconsin , S.Eno from U.Maryland, C.Gerber from UIC, K.Hahn from Northwestern U., and A.Yagil from UC San Diego.

The RAAB was asked to review the longer-term needs and cost estimates, the impact of proposed cuts in U.S. CMS computing upgrades, and the tight management reserve and carry-over allocations in the current spending plan. The board was asked to provide recommendations for the balance of operations versus HL-LHC upgrade allocations, in particular for 2016, in time for the 2016 budget process. 

The RAAB undertook a detailed examination of the 2015/16 Operations Program budget. It provided a draft report and preliminary recommendations at the end of this quarter. The RAAB concluded that the budget is indeed very tight and it will require very careful management to provide for both the expansion of computing needed for the analysis of Run 2 data and a level of HL-LHC Upgrade R&D necessary to complete the technical design and secure project approval.

The board noted the possibility that expensive repairs will be needed for the endcap hadron calorimeter, which has to be considered as an additional cost risk. The RAAB believes that the current HL-LHC R&D plan, calling for funding of ~$6.4M of which $1M would come from outside the Operations Program, is approximately correct but that some more scrubbing or deferral of costs until 2017 may be possible. The report provides specific principles for use in prioritization of upgrade activities to guide the process. 

The RAAB also finds that it is essential to maintain the budget for computing hardware at the level presented at the recent budget review in September. This cost number takes into account the lower costs that have recently been obtained for disk procurement and several cost reduction measures implemented by operations program management, but does not foresee reduction in the computing resource upgrades.
 
The RAAB recommends that some of the funding allocations for computing upgrades and HL-LHC R&D investments should be held back as management reserve. This would allow changes based on developments during the year, allowing reallocation of funds between ops and upgrades and between different upgrade projects, based on changing needs.

Even with these very stringent measures, the RAAB found it likely that management reserves will have to be used up in 2016, putting future years at risk. While the RAAB has only looked briefly at 2017, it anticipates the need for a budget for computing hardware that is similar to 2016 and increased HL-LHC upgrade R&D needs. While some help, about $1.25M, is expected for upgrade R&D from “OPC” funding, it will be hard to maintain even the same level of funding as in 2016.

### Summary

So far, 2015 turned out to be a successful but tough year for CMS. Run 2 data taking started successfully with improved detector, software and computing systems, despite very significant challenges between physics, operations, and upgrades.  The improvements in detectors, DAQ, Software, Computing that were installed during LS1 work well and were successful. The data taking goes well, and CMS is achieving high data quality and run efficiencies. However, this quarter also saw slower than expected LHC ramp-up of intensity and persistent problems with the cryogenic system needed to supply the CMS magnet with liquid helium. Still, CMS is on track to take excellent data efficiently and the collaboration is excited about the physics opportunities of LHC Run2.

The U.S. CMS Operations Program is following the spending plan, tracking variances and staying within the budget envelope. The funding level in 2015 is relatively low compared to previous run startup years and the additional needs for HL-LHC R&D are very challenging. This requires prioritizing, cut backs and resourcefulness, and prioritization decisions by the program managers are being aided by the new Resource Allocation Advisory Board.

