\clearpage

# Program Manager's Summary

During this quarter, the first quarter of  **calendar year 2016** (2016Q1), the LHC and CMS were in a 4-month long "year end technical stop" (YETS).  CMS used the machine downtime to make repairs and enhancements to various elements of the detector.

Important and extensive work was done to clean the "cold box" used to refrigerate and liquefy helium gas to cool the CMS superconductor solenoid magnet. The oil separator unit on the surface was replaced with a new one that has much higher capacity. The helium transfer line was replaced, the whole cold box system was cleaned with solvents, and all filters were replaced. Analysis of the cleaning solvent showed that significant amounts of BREOX oil had accumulated in the system, that have now been successfully removed. The magnet is being cooled down for operations during the startup of the LHC machine in April.

Repairs of CMS systems, in particular leaks in the EMU cooling systems, are described at some detail in the detector operations section. To keep systems running and commissioned, during the technical stop CMS ran a campaign of so-called global runs with cosmic rays that allowed the commissioning of the detector to proceed without beam.  

Software and Computing was busy with supporting data analysis, and preparing systems for the expected extensive data taking run.  The Tier-1 and Tier-2 facilities met performance metrics, while also undergoing upgrades and enhancements that will improve throughput.  Fermilab performed significant upgrades of disk storage systems.  The operations teams closed out processing of 2015 data and delivered large numbers of simulated events. Preparing for the run, the deployment of multi-core jobs running multi-threaded applications made good progress.  A major version of the experiment software (CMSSW) was released, which is targeted at 2016 data taking, and which supports multi-threading and many other features. R&D continues to prepare computing for the longer term.

A particular highlight was a successful demonstrator project of using of the Amazon cloud computing service for production, supported in part by a grant from amazon.com, to deliver large simulation samples in time for actual use in results presented at winter conferences. The Fermilab Scientific Computing Division started the HEPcloud project, in collaboration with CMS and OSG, with the goal to transform part of the U.S. facilities to a services platform.  External commercial and opportunistic computing services will be accessible to HEPcloud users, CMS amongst them. This will include amazon.com and High Performance Computing (HPC) centers funded by DOE and NSF. For U.S. CMS the main goal for this year is to establish and make available seamless access to large on-demand computing resources for fast-turnaround data processing. 

The spending plan for 2016 was developed with input from a series of budget reviews in the fall, input from the Resource Allocation Advisory Board RAAB, and discussions with the funding agencies and the Joint Oversight Group. Funding levels for 2016 are low compared to previous years and Run-1. The program needs to accommodate very significant needs for funding of HL-LHC R&D to prepare for the upgrade project. The U.S. CMS Operations Program is following a tight spending plan with only very small reserve, as shown in the Resource Manager's report in the next sections, requiring careful tracking of variances to ensure we can stay within the funding envelope.

Luminosity expectations for the physics run starting next quarter are for 25/fb, to be accumulated in 150 days planned for  $pp$ luminosity running. This represents a large increase in available luminosity for CMS at 13 TeV, and the outlook for potential physics discoveries are exciting!
